When the world of your name day celebrates yours, my Papa, after all, it brings joy to me too, with the reason for the feelings of submission, May you live happily, do not know unpleasant blows, May God always favor successful fate, I wish you these wishes with desire. F. Chopin.
 Your name day, Mom, I congratulate you! Let the heavens come true, what I feel in my heart: May you always be healthy and happy, May you spend the longest life successfully. F. Chopin.
 What great joy I feel in my heart! When such a pleasant, dear and wonderful Day begins, which I congratulate, Wishing you long years of happiness, In health, vitality, prosperity, peace: Let heaven's gifts flow generously to you! F. Chopin.
Dear Papa! Although it would be easier for me to express my feelings if I could express them in musical tones, but when the best concert of my attachment to you, Dear Papa, cannot be embraced, I must use the simple words of my heart to pay you the most tender gratitude and filial affection fold. F. Chopin.
"Dear Marylski! I myself visited Mr. Zabalewicz to find out when the course for beginners, not the exams, begins; he replied that the courses would start either on the sixteenth or seventeenth of that month, because the Commission had not yet decided whether the fifteenth or sixteenth public meeting of the Academy was to be held. Besides, he told me that there would be lectures in the morning and exams in the afternoon, and that he would not register anyone from the fifteenth. Sorry for the bad writing, I'm in a hurry. So tell Weltz what I have written to you, and bow down very much to him and Titus for me. Białobłocki arrived in Warsaw on Saturday, he is to enroll on Tuesday, leave on Wednesday and then return to the course. Mom, Papa, to Mrs. and Mrs. Marylski, to your sister Ludwika, they send their regards. I embrace you with my brothers. F. Chopin. P. Kulikowski, Karwowski, Wilczyński and Krzywicki were resigned, and in place of Mr. Kulikowski, the professor from Kalisz accepted the professorship. The Lord of Good Eyes sends you bows. Goodbye. Do not show this letter to anyone, because everyone will say that I can't write at all and I don't know anything about politics."
"Beloved Parents. I am healthy by the grace of God and the most pleasant time is always passing me by. I don't read, I don't write, but I play, I draw, I run, I use the fresh air, either when I go for a walk in a vehicle, or on a gray participe du verbe connaître, just like yesterday, when I was driving around the fields. I eat with an extraordinary appetite, and I don't need anything to fully satisfy my skinny belly, which is already starting to get fat, as long as I have permission [!] and the freedom to eat country bread . Although Gerardot did not allow me to eat rye bread, this was only applicable to Warsaw bread, not to country bread. He wouldn't let me eat it because it was sour, and saffron had no acid at all. The black one and the white one. The one made of coarse flour and the one made of fine flour, in the end this one would taste better to Gerard than the other one, and if he could taste it, he would probably let me eat it, because it is a doctor's practice to let patients what they like. But that's not enough; Warsaw is a city and Szafarnia is a village. There rolls for everyone, and here almost only one for me. How then can Mama not give me permission? Haven't I made it clear enough that I can eat country bread? If only Gerardot were in Warsaw, I would immediately ask Ms. Dziewanowski [!] for a loaf of bread and send it by post in a box, and Gerardot would give permission with the first bite of a slice. Therefore, in the hope that I will obtain what I am asking for (with the permission of Miss Ludwika and Miss Józefa, who have already allowed me once in the hope of the permission to come), I am finishing my dissertation on this matter. – On Saturday, there were many guests in Szafarnia: Mr. Podowski, Mr. Sumiński, Mr. and Mrs. Piwnicki, Mr. Chamberlain Piwnicki, Ms. Borzewska, Mrs. Dziewanowski's brother [!], Mr. Dobrzeniecki with Białobłocki. – On Sunday we were in Gulbiny at Mr. and Mrs. Piwnicki's, today we are in Sokołów with the Dobrzeniecki. “I take pills regularly, and I drink half a carafe of Tyzanne every day without interruption. I don't drink anything at the table, only a little sweet wine, I eat fruit, but as ripe as possible and approved by Miss Ludwika. – We are awaiting Papa with the greatest impatience, and I am asking Papa, if Papa would be kind enough to buy from Brzezina Air Moore variée pour le pianoforte ? quatres mains par Ries, and bring them because I want to play with Mrs. Dziewanowska; except that Papa can bring either a prescription or a jar of pills, because the only ones I have will last 27 days by today's reckoning. Besides, I have nothing to write, except that Ludwika should inform me about the health of Mama and Papa, of whom I have no doubt that he is now completely healed to his back. – Ludka, Izabelka, Emilka, Zuzia, Mrs. Dekert, Miss Leszczyńska. I send my regards to the Grasshopper and Chomontowski. I kiss the hands and feet of the Beloved Parents, the most affectionate son of FF Chopin. Mrs. Dziewanowska, Mrs. Dziewanowskie, Mr. Juliusz and Domuś send bows to Mom, Papa and children. Mr Żywny, Mr Siebert, Mr Woycicki, my respect. nb. Mr. Chamberlain Piwnicki bows to Papa and is happy to see Papa."
"KURYER SZAFARSKI On August 16, 1824. National memory of 1820: a silted pond in the yard. National News On August 11, JP Fryderyk Chopin took a course on a brave horse; raced to the finish line; and although several times he could not race Mrs. Dziewanowska walking on foot (which was not his fault but the horse's), he nevertheless won the victory over Miss Ludwika, who had already come quite close to the finishing line on foot. – JP Franciszek Chopin goes for a walk every day, but with such honors that he always sits on the back. – JP Jakub Chopin drinks six cups [!] of acorn coffee a day, while Mikołajek eats four rolls every day, by the way, apart from a huge dinner and a three-course supper. On the 13th and rb JPan Better made himself heard on the piano with an extraordinary talent. This virtuoso, a Berliner, plays to the taste of J.P. Berger (that Skolimowski piano player), surpasses Ms. Łagowska in the stroke and the arrangement of the fingers, and he plays with such feeling that almost every note seems to come not from the heart, but from a powerful belly. On the 15th and 15th, important news came, how by chance a turkey behind the granary in the corner had hatched. This important event not only contributed to the multiplication of the Indyki family, but also increased the treasury revenues and ensured their growth. “Last night a cat snuck into the dressing room and broke a Juice Bottle; but as, on the one hand, he is worthy of the gallows, on the other hand, he deserves to be scorned [!], because he chose the smallest one. – On the 14th day, the hen was lame, and the drake lost a leg in a duel with a goose. The cow has become so violently ill that she is grazing in the garden. - On the 14th, the verdict was issued that, under pain of death, no piglet should dare enter the garden. Foreign News A local citizen wanted to read the Monitor. So he sent a servant to the Carmelite priests in Obory, asking for a periodical. The servant, never having heard of periodical writing in his life, twisted the word and asked the priests about hemorrhoids. In Bocheniec, a fox ate two defenseless gander; whoever catches him should deign to inform the Bocheniec court, which will surely punish the criminal in accordance with the laws and regulations. And to the giver of the fox, these two gander will be given as a worthy reward. It is allowed to send Censor LD"
KURYER SZAFARSKI On August 19, 1824. National News. Pichon and played Kalkbrenner's concert, which, however, made not so much an impression, especially on small figures, as a Jew played by the same Mr. Pichon. On the 18th month and month of JP. FF. MI Chopin drank seven cups of acorn coffee. It is to be expected that he will drink eight soon.
"Dear Willie! I thank you for remembering me, but on the other hand, I am angry with you for being so ugly, bad, blah, finally, for being so et caetera and writing to me only in half a pen. Did you miss paper, pen or ink? Maybe you didn't have time? Or did you not want to write properly at the end, and not remember me at the end? Hey, because it's this: he rides a horse - he has fun, he doesn't think about me ... But whatever - give me a kiss, and yes. I am glad that you are healthy and cheerful, because this is what is needed in the country, and at the same time it is pleasant to me that I can write to you. I'm having a good time too, and you're not the only one who rides a horse, because I can sit on a horse too. Don't ask if I'm good, but I can; at least so that the horse slowly goes where it wants, and I, like a monkey on a bear, sit on it with fear. So far I haven't had a case of ordering from a horse, because the horse didn't throw me off, but... maybe when I order, if he likes it. I will not bother you with my business, because I know it will be of no use to you. Flies often land on my haughty nose, but that's okay, because it's almost a habit of these obtrusive animals. Mosquitoes bite me, but it's less because it's not on my nose. I swing around the garden and sometimes I walk. I go to the forest, and sometimes I ride, by the way, not on a horse, but in a carriage, or in a blanket, or in a carriage, but with such honors [!] that I always sit on the back, and never on the front. ""I may have bored you already, but what can you do?"" If not, write to the nearest post office, and I will continue my literals as soon as possible. So I end my letter without any compliments, but in a friendly way. Be healthy, Beloved Wiluś, and please, write to me, not just assign. We'll see you in 4 weeks. I hug you warmly, your sincere friend FFChopin. I send my respects to Mom and Papa, and I hug my brothers."
KURYER SZAFARSKI On August 24, 1824. Foreign News The day of 20th and 20th in Obrów was circular. The whole village, gathered in front of the manor, rejoiced sincerely, especially after the vodka, the wenches in a squeaky semitonic-false voice sang a well-known song: Ducks in the mud in front of the manor: Our Lady in pure gold. A string hangs in front of the mansion: Our gentleman is a diver. A snake hangs in front of the mansion: Our Miss Maryanna will get married. There is a cap in front of the manor: Our maid is staring.
"KURYER SZAFARSKI Friday, August 27, 1824. Recollection. Year 1798. A chestnut stallion, returning home, died on the very border. Wiadomości Krajowe Dnia Dnia 25 m. i rb J. Panna Kostena, that lady who once called J. Szymon in a charming voice, gay, gay, leaving the kitchen with a bucket full of water, stared, strummed and broke the bowl. - Such a great case was immediately reported to the editor of ""Kuryer"", who, considering it a plaything of extraordinary dexterity, gave it the first place among national news. – Day 26 m. and r. A chicken monster was found in the Chicken Coop. This bogeyman is two-legged, with one wing, no backside and no head. The stewardess of the chicken tries to send it to Warsaw or to another capital city as much as possible, so that, if recognized there, it can take a place in the ranks of special phenomena of nature. JPan Pichon experiences great anguish because of his cousins, of whom he found many in Szafarnia. They bite him as best they can, but it's a good thing they don't bite him on the nose, or he'd have an even bigger one than he already has. On the 26th month and year Sudyna, a female dog, caught [!] a partridge in the grain. JW Panna Kozaczka, seeing this, took the poor dead woman from her and hung her on a pear tree. The ingenious bitch shook the pear and jumped until she got a partridge, which, having caught, devoured tasty. – Descendants of those famous Heroes who defended the Capitol from the Gauls, often buy oats on the trunk. This rubbish sometimes kills merchants; for many of them are hit in the head with a stick [!], and even more die in various ways. “The brother of that melancholy gulak has taken a rotten fever from grief and lies without hope of life. – On the 25th, Duck, sneaking out of the henhouse very early in the morning, drowned himself. The cause of this suicide has not yet been ascertained; because the family does not want to talk. “The cow is much healthier, and no one doubts her complete recovery. Foreign News On May 26th in Sokołów, a turkey sneaked into the garden. Kania, who had been raised in the garden since she was young, had never seen a turkey in her life, looked at him askance, and when she approached, she wanted to scratch his eyes out. The turkey puffed up, and seeing that nothing would come of it, took to its beak. The fight has begun; victory favors neither side, until finally, after a long skirmish, the victorious Turkey, having pecked out the kite's right eye, ended the duel sadly. JPan Pichon was on the 26th month and month in Golub. Among other beauties and foreign details he saw the Foreign Pig, which occupied the special attention of this distinguished traveler. On the 25th of March in Białków, a cat strangled a hen, which no one can regret. A certain Gentleman from the area, despite the strictest search of the guards on the border, embezzled three sticks under his coat, because they were in Golub during the frock coat fair on the 24th and he got it. Feel free to send. LD censor"
"KURYER SZAFARSKI Tuesday, August 31, 1824. Flashback. A mouse of 1802 chewed a hole in the shoe of Miss Józefa Dziewanowska. National News On 28 mrb, when JPan Pichon, employed by the toilet, was talking about breakfast, a barefoot lady rushes into the room screaming. Pichonek, surprised, opened his mouth and at first stood like a gaper, but after a while he found out the reason for tears and complaints: Mr. Stolnik Wiktor Sikorowski, commonly called Fichtur after Miss Michuchna, quarreled with Miss Kozaczka; and after long quarrels and processions, he so beautifully painted his fist on the head [!] lady that she was forced to look for satisfaction in a higher authority. On the 29th and 29th a wagon of Jews was going. Die ganze Familie consisted of aus eine Maciore, three large Jews, two small ones, and a network of Jewish women; the villagers were sitting in a heap, like Dutch herrings. In the meantime, they hit a stone, overturned, and lay on the sand in the following order: first the children, each in a different position, the greater part with their legs up, and on top of them the Maciore, groaning under the weight of the Jews, whose hoops flew with the force of the flight. On the 30th month and a half in the cowshed three girls had a fight. Two in particular, armed with a spear [1] and a spear, beat the third defenseless one, and even though this one got both a spear and a spear (incidentally, on the muzzle), she could not resist the others. On the 30th, Mrs. Zakierska, a citizen of Szafarska, having quarreled with the other, wanted to drown herself out of anger that she could not do anything to her. It was fortunate that Mrs. Szreder, the wife of Mr. Gärtner [2] , that old citizen, saw this and ran over; and when her head was in the pond, she deftly pulled it out by the legs and saved her life. Sudyna, a female dog, following Panna Józefka through the village yesterday, caught a goose, strangled it and ate it. – On the 31st of May Four geese were caught in the damage. So far they are in free custody [!], but it is not known where it will end. The cow is getting better and better, and at the general consultation, the doctors judged that there was no longer the slightest danger. Foreign News On the 29th, Mr. Pichon, passing through Nieszawa, heard Catalani sitting on the fence, singing something with her whole mouth. It took him a lot, and although he heard the aria and the voice, dissatisfied with it, he tried to hear the poems. Twice he passed the fence, but in vain, for he understood nothing; until at last, moved by curiosity, he took out three pennies and promised them to the singer if she would repeat the song to him. She fidgeted for a long time, wincing and pronouncing, but encouraged by three pennies, she made up her mind and began to sing a mazurka, from which the Editor, with the permission of the authorities and the Censorship, quotes only one stanza as an example: Patsajze there behind the gules, behind the gules, how the wolf dances, And after all, he has no wife, because he is so worried. (bis) In Radomin on 29 mrb the cat got mad. Luckily he didn't bite anyone, but he ran and jumped around the field until they killed him; for after he had killed him, he ceased and raged no more. In Dulnik, a wolf ate a sheep for supper. The worried guardians of the remaining lambs offer the tail and ears to the one who would catch the wolf, tie it up and bring it to the inquisition of the family council. Feel free to send. Censor LD [1] Węborek - a bucket, a wooden vessel with a handle for carrying water. [2] Gärtner (German) – gardener."
"KURYER SZAFARSKI Friday September 3, 1824 - Memory. Founding of Szafarnia in 1740 by Wawrzyniec Szafarniak – Wiadomości Krajowe On the 1st of May, it was JPan Pichon who played a Jew, when Mr Dziewanowski, having summoned a Jewish paker, asked him for his opinion about the Jewish virtuoso [!]. Mosiek approached the window, poked his hunchbacked nose into the room and listened, saying that if Mr. Pichon wanted to play at a Jewish wedding, he would earn himself at least ten plates. Such a statement encouraged Mr. Pichon to study [1] as much as possible this kind of music and who knows if in time he will not completely give himself up to such a favorable harmony. On the 2nd day of the month, the cat that had just arrived sneaked out of the room. The caretaker ran after him, and seeing that he was running away, she began to pursue him. She was already catching up with him when the cat, having leaped over the fence, was resting safely on the other side; but Dama, desperate to catch him, climbed the fence to get to the other side, meanwhile her leg breaks... equilibrum [2] loses... and... strums like a cake on the ground. On the 3rd day, Mr. Łukasz, ex officio, Parobek, climbed onto the pear tree [!] and began to shake the hands of the ladies who were greedily waiting for the pears to fall under the shade of the tree; and having shaken several times, when none of them wanted to fall down, he himself, nota bene by chance, instead of a prick, fell to the ground. On the 2nd day, Mrs. Brygida, the cook, turning around with bread in her bowl, she threw all the bread on the ground due to her excessive grace and dexterity. On the 1st, a Negro, going out with the Lord to the field towards evening, killed a partridge, nota bene without gunpowder and gunpowder. The cow is incomparably better, she is already receiving visits, and soon she can and will return it herself. Foreign News. On the 5th of March, the wedding of JMr Jan Lewandowski, a carpenter, with Miss Katarzyna Ciżewska, daughter of the Governor of the Bocheniec Land, will take place in Bocheniec. – The Governor's Lady is making great preparations, and the groom is already inviting guests to the wedding. Among other things, Mr. Pichon received an invitation, which he is unspeakably happy about, along with the editor of ""Kuryer"", who will report the most important scenes and events of this wedding in the next issue. On the 2nd of the mrb in Białków, a fierce battle broke out between a dog and a cat over a piece of meat lying on the road. Both husbands fought with the fearless mind; the smell of meat aroused valor and appetite mutual envy; they fought valiantly for a long time; fate, unsettled for a long time, filled the spectators with fear; until finally the cat, having scratched out the eyes of Spitz already exhausted by the fight and weakened by numerous wounds with his sharp claws, pushed back twice more, strangles him... and when everyone, surprised, laments the fate of the poor doggie, the winner lifts a piece of meat in triumph; soon, however, heavily scarred, he faints, falls... topples over... and... dies. On the 31st in Rętwiny, wolves ate twelve sheep. Whoever can capture the cherzt [!], let him deliver it to the Governor of the Rętwińska Land, and he will receive as a reward half of one of the sheep just mentioned. Feel free to send. Censor LD [1] Sztuderować (from German) – here: practice. [2] Equilibrum (Latin aequilibrum) – balance."
"Dear Jasia! It is good that such an auspicious opportunity has arisen to write to you. First of all, what I tell you is that we are all quite healthy; secondly, that the examen is close, that it is already under your nose (behind your belt, Poles used to say that I don't wear a belt, only a big nose, so you have a clear reason why I am writing to you that examen is under my nose). Do not expect me to write you much, because I am very busy, and the gentleman who gave the note from Miss Konstancja has let us see him tonight, and is leaving tomorrow morning. – Kressner and Mrs. Bianchi are giving a concert on Monday, but not at the theater, but in Elert's room in the German Hotel. It is a concert ? la Krogólski, for private tickets; Kressner gave me 12, but I only sold 3, because they cost 6 zlotys. I am sorry that you are not here, because sometimes it was very good with Wasan Dobrodz. chat, joke, sing, cry, laugh, beat, etc. I will write you a more extensive letter in the next letter, by post, when we see each other, because we hear that the exam is on the 26th of this month. I'm writing in the dark. Tomorrow morning I have to get up, today I sit and sit, sit, sit, and maybe sit all night. friends! vale! [1] and I have nothing to tell you except that I have not yet received a letter from you from Sochaczew. If you haven't written, you'll be punished in the next letter. Here, on this page, I have to write something for you, and it is for you to write, are you healthier on your feet; and at the same time, did you get lucky. This letter is like a field where peas and cabbage are mixed up. There is no logic that se kil mank de lodge, me ke fer, a se chat, punish the padetan, pur ekrir onetman. Si se kom sa, forgive me, I will write you more and better in the mail, and now I hug you warmly. FF. Chopin. Lively, Mrs. Dekert, healthy, they do not know that I am writing to you, otherwise they would bow. My respects to your papa. [1] Friends! vale! (Latin) – be well, my friend!"
"my wow! La letr, kewu ma we zekryt, made me happy, although sad, who calls, I learned nuwels. Wotr śambi wu fe mal , that's what made me afflize, not ke wu zet ase ge , as you can see in the letra, sa ma done for sos and I stay in a better mood. – Demes nu finis are our exam; that ne prandre pa de pry, kar le lawman le pren. – When I am with you, I will explain this riddle to you; ... es posibl, q d ę p a ę lawman?... I would have to explain myself for a long time before I could guess it to you in a letter, on the contrary, one word of mouth will let you know the finesse of this expression. On Monday, as Miss Ludwika has decided, we are leaving, so we will be there on Wednesday in Szafami, si wu wule me wuar, wene le bonuses, kar otrman good my babysitter will not let me go to you first. By this time tomorrow, kel boner! what a back! if I go to bed, I won't get up so soon on Friday. I have new royal court kiulottes... well done (although that last one isn't true), a new neckerchief, or another term, or perhaps you don't understand it, a tie, for gold, that ne me suwie pliu kobię, that le peie awek larżan e la ma de ma ser Luis. Ekute, ekute mamsel Dorote Adolf Szydłowski as a servant. Ekute, that's how I start your homework, which is the end of the letter; see you soon; you know that I don't like to scribble much, except for 4 hands, so forgive me for concluding. – We are all healthy; I have already received 3 letters from you; exam tomorrow; Miss Leszczyńska bows to you; Mr. Domowicz was in Warsaw; Alive always in an old wig; Miss Dekert hugs you; Barciński kisses; I will bring you a book for Okuń; everyone, our whole house bows to you; and declare the same to your Pope. give me a kiss; I love you. Ah, I smelled Sokołów! FF. Chopin."
"Beloved Parents! I'm healthy, I take pills, but I don't have much of them anymore, I think about home and I'm sorry that I will have to do without seeing my dearest people all this summer, but often thinking that later I will leave home not for a month, but for a longer time will come, I regard this time as a prelude to the future. It is a mental prelude, because I have to sing a musical one at the very departure. Apparently also here in Szafarnia I will sing a chime when I leave her, maybe I won't see her again so soon, because I don't have the same hope [...] as last year. But abandoning those sentiments with which I am able to write a whole page, let us return to yesterday, yesterday and today. The funniest yesterday, maybe even from all the days of my stay in Szafarnia, includes two important events. Primo: that Miss Ludwika returned safely from Obrów, assisted by Mrs. Bożewska herself and Miss Tekla Bożewska, secondly, that on the same day a detour of two villages took place. We were sitting at supper, finishing the last meal, when in the distance we could hear choirs of false discontents, either from women gagging through their noses [...], or from girls half a step higher with the larger half of their mouths mercilessly squealing, to the accompaniment of some violinists , and about three pages that, behind each sung alto stanza, spoke in a voice behind. Having left the company, Domus and I got up from the table; we ran out into the courtyard, where the whole crowd, advancing slowly, was approaching the house more and more. Miss Agnieszka Guzowska and Miss Agnieszka Turowska-Bąkiewna (sic) pompously with wreaths on their heads presided over the reapers, led by two married women, Jaśkowa and Maćkowa, with bundles in their hands. Standing in such a column in front of the manor house, they sang all the stanzas in which they label everyone, including the following two stanzas on me: In front of the manor house [...] a green heart, Our Varsovian is thin as a dog. In the barn there are mayflies, Our Varsovian very fast. At first I didn't know if it was me, but later, when Jaśkowa dictated the whole song to me, she said, when it came to those two stanzas, that ""now on you"". \r\n \r\n I guessed that the second stanza is a concept of a maiden whom I had been chasing with a rope a few hours before in the field [...] So, having sung this cantata, the two maidens mentioned above go with wreaths to the manor to Mr. meanwhile, two farmhands with buckets of unclean water, waiting for them at the door in the hall, greeted both Agnieszka's girls so beautifully that each of their noses was dripping, and in the hall there was a trickle; wreaths and bunches were laid, and as Fryc cut Dobrzynski on the violin, so did everyone in the courtyard dance. It was a beautiful night, the moon and the stars were shining, but two candles had to be brought out, one for the steward who treated vodka, and one for Fryc, who, though on 3 pages, fiddled so much as if the other couldn't handle 4. Jumps, rollers and obertas began, but to encourage the farmhands standing quietly and only on the spot, I went to the first pair of waltzes with Miss Tekla, and at the end with Mrs. Dziewanowska. Afterwards, everyone got so excited that they danced in the courtyard till they dropped; I rightly say that it fell, because several pairs fell when the first bare foot touched a pebble. It was almost eleven o'clock when Frycowa brings a basset, worse than a violin, with only one side. Having picked up a dusty little one, when I started to bass, he was pounding so hard that everyone came to look at the two Frycs, one sleeping on the fiddle, the other on a one-sided, monochord, dusty [...] rattling bastard, when suddenly Miss Ludwika called ""raus""; so it was time to go back, say good night and go to sleep. So the whole company dispersed and went to the inn from the courtyard to play; where, that is, they had fun for a long time, whether it was good or bad, I don't know, because I haven't asked about it yet. I was very merry that evening, and very pleased with the two things that had happened. There was no page 4; so what to do? where can I get it?... I'm going to the yard, and here Mr. Leon and Wojtek, with the short ones, are asking for help; so I got 9 threads from Mrs. Girl; I gave it to them, they made a page for themselves, but unfortunately fate wanted them to dance about three pages, because as soon as they made a new one, just a fifth broke, the place of which a freshly made one had to replace. Secondly, Miss Tekla Borzewska danced with me twice; I talked to her a lot, as is customary, so I was called her lover and fiancé, only some other peasant corrected the mistake, and later my name was even known, and the tailor, when I wanted to dance with Mrs. Dziewanowska in the first pair, said: now Mr. Szopę with Your Majesty. I promised to send, in today's letter, Ms. Marianna Kuropatwianka, the sister of the famous Werona Kuropatwianka, who fought a great battle yesterday with Mrs. Kaszubina with rake, head and chubby face; fortunately, this battle did little damage, because only Mme Cachubina suffered a little in the head, and Mile Pedrix ę mal de ne [ 1] [...] who involuntarily endured ę to drato [ 2 ]. So I send this estamp [3] hit as rarely. The mechanics broke today, but the similarity remains. I do not ascribe this resemblance to myself, as a painter blinded by the greatness of his work, and indeed, at first it seemed to me that I had missed it, when Jaś, walking across the room, looking at the picture he was painting, partridge puff,” he exclaimed. At the opinion of such a connoisseur, at the confirmation of Mrs. Franecka, as well as the kitchen maids, I had to believe that she was completely similar. Tomorrow morning we go to Turzno, and we are not to return until Wednesday, so I doubt that I will write a letter to the post office on Wednesday, let Ludwika expect a letter in a week's time. I am not sending any waltz, but I am sending a Jewish letter from Mr. Hyrz from Gołubie to Mr. Józefat, who, knowing my deep Jewish erudition, sent this manuscript as a gift. It is better written than the one I sent to Mr. Woycicki last time, but it is also more incomprehensible. For the sake of understanding the subscript of the manuscript, I report that Nakazye is meant to mean occasion. For a long time I was tormented as to what kind of order it would be, until finally, having looked into my dictionary, having derived its etymology, I came to the conclusion that it must be an occasion. I am asking you to preserve and not disturb such a precious treasure. “Neither did the Chosen One see Białobłocki. I became the local Krystyani from yesterday and I have already started to build the bridge. I ride the wagon almost every day. The books are sleeping because the weather is beautiful. Moschel at work. I took eight baths, the last one almost from the decoction alone. I hug all children warmly. Mother and Papa's feet and hands are kissed warmly by the most affectionate son of F. Chopin. I am sending Mr. Woycicki a few Danish words, eg Kobler [...] picture, axbil dinger description, Kiobenhavn Copenhagen. Mr Żywn., Mr. Ba... Or... Ju... Colb., Matusz., Now., C... etc., etc. my kisses, Mrs. Dibert [Dekert?], Miss Leszczyńska etc. to all .\r\n [1] Mlle... de ne (properly: Mile Pedrix un mal de nez ) (French) – Miss Partridge has a sore nose. [2] Ę ku drato (properly: un coup de râteau) (French) – hit with a rake. \r\n \r\n [3] Estamp (properly: estampe) (French) – engraving, engraving. \r\n \r\n \r\n"
"Beloved, dear Jasia! Ah! Madame Sévigné would not be able to describe to you my joy at the letter received from you so unexpectedly, for I could have expected death sooner than such a siurprize; it never even occurred to me that this dead scribbler, that philologist who only sits in Szyller, would take a pen in his hand with the intention of writing a letter to a dulcimer player who was almost unleashed like a whip; to the one who had not yet read one sheet in Latin; to that piglet, which, fattening on broth, intends to thicken even by a tenth of your fat. It is indeed a great grace, or rather a great grace of my Jasiek; and if anyone, then I, if when, I can now value her too highly; and I would not have transferred it to myself if, insulting JWP, I had not bothered to pick up a pen. Everything I've written so far has been an exordium [1], now I'm actually coming to the point and now, if you wanted to scare me with your Puławy and hare, my Toruń and hare, but certainly bigger than yours, and four partridges, which I used to get from the field brought, to humiliate this inexperienced marksman, I think. What have you seen in Puławy? Well? You saw only a small part of what my eyes looked upon in their entirety. After all, have you seen in Sibyl a brick taken from Copernicus' house, from the place of his birth? and I saw the whole house, the whole place, though a little profaned now. Imagine, dear Jasiu, in that corner, in this room where this famous astronomer was struck by life, there is a bed of some German who, having eaten enough potatoes, often throws zephyrs quite often, and on those bricks, one of which is ceremonies were sent to Puławy, many a bedbug is crawling. Yes, my brother! The German does not care who lived in this house; it is allowed to cover the entire wall, which Princess Czartoryska would not do for one brick. But having abandoned Copernicus, I will start with Toruń gingerbread. It is not without the fact that you do not know them well, or perhaps better than Copernicus, with all this I will bring you important news about them, which may be of some use to whom it was scribbling; this message is as follows. According to the custom of local gingerbreaders, gingerbread shops are halls surrounded by well-locked chests, in which gingerbreads, sorted and arranged in dozens, rest. You probably won't find this in Adagiorum Hiliades, but I, knowing your curiosity in such important matters, inform you so that when explaining Horace, you will be able to cope with doubtful and intricate meanings. This is all I am able to write about Toruń, maybe I will tell you more, but I will only write to you that the greatest impression, alias [2], was made by the gingerbread cookies. I saw the whole fortification from all sides of the city, in all its details, I saw the famous machine for carrying sand from one place to another, a machine of the simplest composition, very interesting, which the Germans call Sandmaschine, besides, churches of Gothic construction, from Funded by the Teutonic Knights, one of which was built in 1231. I saw a sloping tower, a famous town hall both inside and out, whose greatest peculiarity is that it has as many windows as there are days in the year, as many halls as there are months, as many rooms as there are weeks, and that the whole structure of it is the most magnificent in a gothic style. All this, however, does not surpass gingerbread, oh, gingerbread, one of which I sent to Warsaw. But what do I see? I have only just sat down, and the last card is before me! It seems to me that I have just begun to write, that I have only just begun to talk to you, and here comes the end! Dear, Beloved Jasiu, I can no longer give you a warm hug. It's already 10 o'clock, everyone goes to bed and it's my turn. In Warsaw on the 22nd (because I won't be sooner) I will finish you orally and give you a warm hug, dear Jasiu. Now, twenty miles away, I press you to my lips, and I bid you farewell, good-bye. Your most sincere, most affectionate friend F. Chopin. How I long to see you, I would offer myself not to play for 2 weeks now to see you in real life, because I see you perfectly every day. Don't show this letter. Because I'm ashamed. I don't know if it makes sense, because I haven't read [1] Exordium (Latin) - introduction. [2] Alias (Latin) – otherwise, or."
"Dear, dear Janek! We are leaving very early tomorrow. Only yesterday I promised to be with you, but only today I could be in Sokołów. I am very sorry that I will not see you again this summer; although on this piece of paper I have to say goodbye to you and give you the letter to Miss Konstancja, which Ludwika sent me in this post. I wish you the best of health. I wish you a full recovery. Kiss your Papa too for me and give thanks for the decoction, for this decoction, to which I owe a great deal. Declare that I will never forget it. So, dear Johnny, we must part without a real goodbye. I kiss you heartily. Remember me as I remember you. FF. Chopin. Miss Florentyna, bows. I would like to follow you to Radomin, but I can't. I'd like to wait - I can't. Because Miss Ludwika, oh that Miss Ludwika! waiting for me, I'll be back soon because I want to pack my things. Give me a kiss! You won't believe how sorry I am, how sorry I am!... I don't want to leave. Why have I gone so far in the carriage, when I have found no one, but at least you will know that I was here. That I was here to say goodbye to you and your Papa. I don't know what I've done, I'm in a position I've never been in before."
"Dear and lovely Jasia! Extra, extra, extrissime your letter made me happy; for immediately after reading it I remembered Sokołów, that Sunday, pantaloons, apples, and the like pleasantly past moments. But extra, extra, extrissime, I'm sorry to think how surprised you were by my silence for so long that you didn't pick up the letter with the goat returning to Szafarnia. ""Don't be surprised, remember when I start writing these letters!"" and besides, how many shelves, cabinets, drawers, how many hundred copies of sheet music in disorder on the piano, like peas and cabbage (even with the insult of the Humls, Ries, Kalkbrenners, whose fate probably assigned a place in such a great republic with Pleiel, Hemerleyn, Hoffmaystra) lying waiting for me! – Well, now Maciejewski, Jasiński, Matuszewski, Koncewicz, Dziekoński, this future Maturitas [1] are speaking! I hope I have already given you an account of the fortnight I have spent, making you only some reminders; I hope that no scolding in the letter from Sokołów will wait for me! So having thrown off the greatest burden, and a double burden at that, because not only is the exkus [2] finished, but also the introduction, that is, the beginning of a letter, which always makes me embarrass (forgive me for sticking some pasta in), I proceed to the real, literal , alias letter correspondence, informing you, I-mo, that we are all well. – Secondly, that we have a new scubent, Tekla Czachowska's brother, our son, and our nephew, Juliusz Czachowski, who, constantly calling his sisters Ciocia Zuzia, Ciocia Ludwisia, Ciocia Izabelka, Ciocia Emilka, and calling me Uncle Frycio, fills the whole house with laughter. Tercja, that the exhibitions in Warsaw are starting, both in the Town Hall and in the halls of the University. – I do not write you what is where, because there is nothing to see yet and I have not seen it yet; however, when my eyes see what a bad table, a bad portre, a bad machine, ba piano, badra, in general kekszos dexelan, my hand will outline for you, and the messenger from Dobrzyń will bring it. – As far as musical news is concerned, it is only heard that a certain JPan Gordon is to come to Warsaw, the son of the merchant who has a glass [!] in Warsaw of mineral waters, a student of the Prague conservatory, whose playing is as interesting as Ewa apples; and I will tell you about it later; this is the end of the news, and with it must be the end of the letter, otherwise it would be the end of Thursday's correspondence, because it's already 4 o'clock. Therefore, I commend myself to the grace of JV Lord Dobr. and my Gracious, and I remain what I was, and even better than I was, because longer FF. Chopin. Respect to your Pope from us and declare that Mrs. Wiłucka was supposed to write back a long time ago! – To Miss Konstancja, kisses from the sisters and Miss Florentyna, and from me on the hand. My respects to the wardrobes, as well as to Płonny, Gulbins, Ugoszcz, etc. Mama and Papa, and children bow to you very much, and write. Ms. Dekert and Bardziński, Zywny bow to you nicely. I don't even make the envelope, only the one that I took off in the square, fresh from Opitz's letter, I appropriate it for myself, I'm in such a hurry! I wanted to take that envelope; but unfortunately too short; I trimmed the letter and it didn't help. [1] Maturitas (Latin) – maturity exam. [2] Excuse (French) - justification."
"Dear Jasia! Dear Jalek!... once again, dear Jasiek! You must be surprised that I have not written to you for so long; do not be surprised; first read the past letter, then the following: One day, sitting at the table with a pen in my hand, I have already written ""Dear Jasiu"" and the first period of the letter, which, because it sounded musically, to Żywny, sitting over the piano Górski, with the greatest pomp. Lively, clapping his hands, wiping his nose, rolling up his handkerchief into a trumpet, stuffing his fat-fashioned white surtute into his pocket, he begins, adjusting his wigs, to ask: ""And to whom is this letter written?"" I answer: To Białobłocki. – “Hun, Hun, to Mr. Białobłocki?” – Yes, to Białobłocki. – “Well, where does it address?” - Where with? to Sokołów, where always. – “And how is Mr. Białobłocki, don't you know?” ""Good enough, better on the leg."" - ""What! better, hun, hun, and that's good; and did he write to Mr. Fridrich?” – He wrote, but a long time ago, I replied. ""How long ago?"" ""Why are you asking like that?"" – “Huh, heh, heh, heh, heh, heh” (Żywny laughs). Surprised, I ask: What do you know about him? – “Hhhhhhhhhhh” (laughs even more, nodding his head). Did he write to you, I ask. ""And he wrote"", replies Zywny and saddens us with the unfavorable news that you are no better off on your feet and that you have gone to Old Prussia for treatment. And where, and where? ""To Bischoffswerther""; it was the first time I heard this city in human mouths, and although otherwise I would have snorted at that Biszofswerter, now I felt sorry, the more that you did not tell me anything about it, especially since it was your turn to write to me. So I finished my correspondence at that time, and not knowing what to write, how to write, where to write, I was so late with my letter that I did not go to the post office at all. So how do you think it came from word to word to a message that was so important to me. I hope you'll forgive me for not writing you a post in the past. I would like to tell you something new, knowing that it might amuse you, but other than the following news, I know nothing. The Barber of Serwilski [!] (Le barbier de Seville) was played on Saturday at the theatre, which is now under the direction of Dmuszewski, Kudlicz and Zdanowicz, and I liked it very much. Zdanowicz, Szczurowski, Polkowski played well; as well as Ashperger and two other people: one constantly snotty, sneezing; the other tearful, thin, in slippers, in a bathrobe, constantly yawning to the beat. In addition, a certain Mr. Rembieliński, the President's nephew, came from Paris to Warsaw, who spent 6 years in Paris and plays the piano as I have never heard anyone before. You can imagine what a delight it is for us, for we have heard nothing excellent here. He is not as an artist, but as an amateur. I won't go into detail about his fast, smooth, round playing, but I'll just tell you that the left hand is as strong as the right hand, which is an extraordinary thing in one person. For a whole sheet would not be enough for me to describe his wonderful talent. Mrs. Dekert is a little weak; but we are all healthy. Adieu, my life, I have to end, because the occupation for Maciek is waiting for armies. Write to me, my life, because I wish our letters would fly like syncopation [!]. Give me a kiss. I hug you heartily FFChopin serd. friend. Bunyamin asked me about you and was surprised that you did not write to him. Respect to your Pope from all of us. Our whole house hugs you, and the children wish you better health [!]. Mom and Papa are waiting for a letter in which they will learn something about your health, and they hug you warmly. [A note on the margin of the page where Żywny is mentioned] Nb. When we asked Żywny why he hadn't said anything about you before, and he told us that because you didn't say anything to him in the letter, that he should bow to us, he took a heavy scolding from Mother. Mrs. Dekert and Cerzynska bow."
"Dear Jasia! Kostusia in Warsaw, so it's impossible for me to refrain from scribbling at least a few lines for you. In spite of the very small amount of news that I have collected for you during this time, I am compelled to recite them to you, however, first starting with the following: I was very worried when I found out that you were worse, but I will see you completely healthy soon. I do not envy your warm treatment very much, but if I knew that you would recover sooner, I would have not shaved myself, just like you, for almost two months. You must have missed that letter, never mind; but you will pick it up; I couldn't write it to your Bischoffswerther, because I didn't know how to address it. But Kostusia is so good that she will send this letter together with that one, if not sent. In such a state of affairs, as you already know from a previous letter, in Warsaw Cyrulik is praised from everywhere in the theater, it is heard that Freszyca, for which they have been gathering for so long, will be played. I also made a new polonaise from Cyrulik, which I like quite a bit; I'm thinking of getting it lithographed tomorrow. Ludwika made a perfect mazurka that Warsaw had not danced for a long time. It is her non plus ultra [1], but also in fact one of the non plus ultras of its kind. Lively, pretty, in a word, for dancing, not praising, rare kindness. I'll play it for you when you come. I became a Licean organist. My wife, then, and all my children, must respect me for two reasons. Ha, Lord Benefactor, what a head I am! The first person in the entire high school after Fr. Pastor! I play every week, on Sundays, at the Visitationists on the organ, and the rest sing. It's hard, my life, to write you anything more this time, I have to go to the Czetwertyński family, and besides Kostusia is leaving. I will write you more at the post office, and now that we are healthy and we hug you, especially me, your dearest. prov. FF. Chopin. Mrs. Dekert, Żywy, Bardz., Leszczyń., everyone kisses you. [ Żywnego's addition - Translation ] Dear Sir. As promised, I expect you a week after the New Year. Remains with kind regards - His friend and servant Wojciech Żywny. [1] Non plus ultra (Latin) - here: the peak of perfection."
"Dear Jasia! I am extremely sorry that I have not heard from you for so long. Even in 1825 I wrote to you, and this is already 1826, and I do not receive any letter! Miss Konstancja, alias Kostusia, sometimes only in letters to Ludwika, which, however, are more frequent than ours, about your health, about health you know, how much our whole house is interested. Every Briefträger [1] (by the way, not Mrs. Wyszyńska) evokes joy when he enters that blue courtyard, but how irritating his person is when his shoes are not heard on the stairs or when Dobrń is not on the list, but some Lublin or Radom with red stands in letters! However, it is not the fault of Briefträger, but rather of Briefschreiber [2], who probably does not write the letter for this reason only, so that the poor fat man, who involuntarily has to climb so high when necessary, does not bother him. But this may be remarked upon: after all, it is quite chilly now, no one complains about the heat; you can hear people coldly complaining; so it doesn't matter if, dear Jasiu, you told him to get up twice before Easter. After such a remark, I hope that I have already secured a copy of this letter. I would like to prepare an answer to this and to that one, written before this letter, but here I am going to your mercy; for knowing the magnanimity of the King (once), I have no doubt about the effect of my requests. – I am not writing to you about Staszyc, because I know that you have sufficient information about his lavish-poor funeral from newspapers and couriers. I will only mention to you that the academics carried him from the Holy Cross all the way to Bielany, where he wanted to be buried, that Skarbek gave a speech at the grave, that they stripped his coffin out of love and enthusiasm, and that I also have a piece of kir as a souvenir, with which were covered with bier, and finally, 20,000 people escorted the body to the place. Several face-to-face skirmishes took place across the road, both with merchants who were struggling to carry the Reverend Husband's body, and with other civilians who also wanted to take the coffin from the Akademiks who were bravely resisting. I cannot forget that I did not also inform you about Dybek's death; they say that Niemcewicz is getting weaker. Everyone gets sick and so do I. Perhaps you expect me to have written all that I have scribbled down from the stool; it's not true, it's from under the quilt, from the head squeezed with a bonnet, because I don't know where from, it hurts 4 days ago. They put leeches on my throat because my glands were swollen, and our Roemer says it's catarrhal affection. It is true that I was not at home every evening from Saturday to Thursday until 2 o'clock, but that wasn't because I always got enough sleep the next day. I would bore you if I had to write more about such a disease for those who are ill, and worse, so I prefer to write down the rest of the paper with something else. And yes, your Papa was in Warsaw, he was with us, he was with Bruner and he ordered a crown for the church. I wanted to write to you through him, but he left, and our letters in Warsaw stayed. Adieu, dear Jasiu, and write to your sincere FFChopin. Mom and Papa, all the children and Zuzia wish you to be healthy soon. Fr. Benjamin was with me, he told you to bow, he will start giving lessons on Wednesday. Mr Zywny, Mrs Dekert, Bardziński, Mr Leszczyńska and all. nb. Bardziński is no longer with us, already close to his master's exam, and he would not have the peace of mind to write a dissertation, but there is another Academician from Lublin, a rather worthy deputy of the good Antoś. Papa for the congratulations [wishes] a thousand times good health to call him sooner. Marylski brought the letter a long time ago, but it's only coming today... [The last three words illegible.] [1] Briefträger (German) – postman. [2] Briefschreiber (German) – writing a letter."
"Dear, Beloved Jasio! I am really ashamed that I am replying to your letter so late; but various circumstances constantly accompanying my person (for you can imagine my condition this year, because you had to endure it once) have not yet allowed me to respond to my former desires. Commission partially accomplished; I bought you notes which, as far as my taste is concerned, you will enjoy yourself at home. As for Glüksberg, Papa himself was with him. However, he told Papa that he did not subscribe for more than a month, that he did not have a catalog yet, and that together he could not give more than a few works. It might still be possible, because he demands a thaler a month, but the worst thing is not knowing which pair of works to choose when there is no list of them yet. Although I bought these scores, I have not yet given them to Vysotsky. There are only Eutherpy, a collection of Rossini's arias and other pieces, for the piano alone, very well translated in Vienna by Diabelli (this work corresponds to the Philomeles for singing), and Kaczkowski's Polonaise, very good, beautiful, in a word, to be listened to and enjoyed ( and thus starting the fingers, probably already rusty, if I may say so), and, if you wish, some nonsense of mine. All this will undoubtedly be at Wysocki's this week. You won't believe how glad I was that you had already left that Biskupiec. I say gladdened... it is in one respect, but in the other it has greatly saddened me. As I see, Majesty Jan, you have drunk German virtue greatly; and something used to invite me to his place, now you advise me not to go away! What can this accursed stinginess do! I wish you had never gone to Biszofswerdter to learn it; all my intentions, the most beautiful projects and plans, everything is now destroyed, and the one who, after all, I thought would be able to rely on him, begins to think something terribly economically stingy. In fact, I am not able to rumble you as I should, but what is delayed will not escape, not now, then later I can find satisfaction, by the way, not with bullets, because you would win, because I gave mine to Rogoziński, who can paint anything. After Rogoziński, I was reminded of Podbielski, whose misfortune I must describe. It will be about 3 months ago, when he was somewhere... [illegible words] the wind blew him, that he was paralyzed. He can't use his leg or his hand, although Zabiełło tries his best; however, it is to be expected that he will come out of it, because he is a little better now, the electrification has helped him so much. Rembieliński, the one I once wrote to you about, I see quite often, you won't believe how beautifully he plays, he was at my place recently, which made me extremely happy. As for the Warsaw news, you have a courier. As for private matters, I can only inform you that Colonel Gutkowski, whose leg I broke, died; that Zubelewicz has a daughter; that Jarocki got married in Podolia and brought his wife right after the wedding; that on Sunday, this week, I was with the Zamoyskis, where they admired Długosz's eolipantalion for almost the entire evening. Długosz sold one eolipantalion to a man named Mewski, who is now getting married, who used to be at Mrs. Pruski's [!] and wore a fairy-tale frock coat; that Kosinski died; that Woelke has a daughter; that Domowicz was recently in Warsaw, he told you to bow; that Zakrzewski in Warsaw; that I have a sheet music cabinet; finally, that my shoes have holes in them and that's why I wear slippers. One would think that I went to Bielany, just like our watchman, who just came to ask for Mother's permission [...] that Bielany... [words illegible] will be numerous this year. My Botanical Garden, that old alias behind the palace, was ordered by the Commission to be very beautifully tidied up. Now there are no carrots, which used to be tasty at the spa, no sandwiches, no gazebos, no lettuce, cabbage, bad smells, etc., but flower beds ? la mani?re anglaise [1] . I have also already written everything that could come to my mind for only a quarter of an hour, so all I can do is assure you that I will always be me towards you and as long as I live, I will always be me. Mama, Papa To your Papa, I also send our respects, and bows to you, because you do not yet have the right to respect. P. Konstancja, kiss the face from all the children, and kiss the hands from me. Mrs. Dekert, Lively, Very. etc., etc. all bow to you. Maybe you won't read me, because you haven't read my handwriting for a long time, but forgive me, because I'm in a hurry to the post office so I don't have time to read it. FFChopin. [1] A la mani?re anglaise (French) – in the English way."
"Dear Jasia! Do not expect in this letter the usual name-day compliments, those feelings, outbursts, exclamation marks, apostrophes, pathetic parts and other such nonsense, dubs, androns and nonsense; it is good for those minds which, in their lack of attachment, are full of trivial words; but an eleven-year-old is bound by a friendship, who has counted months together 132 times, started weeks 468, 3960 days, 95040 hours, 5702400 minutes, 342144000 breathed seconds together, he does not even need to mention himself, he does not need to write letters with compliments, because he will never write what he would like. So, proceeding ad rem [1] , I begin to talk nonsense; and first, throw away what I cannot digest, that is, His Majesty's benefactor has not written to me for several months. Why? Why? cur? Warum? Pourquoi? ... I'm very annoyed by this, and if things don't improve, we'll be bad. That I can't write so often is free; you know I'm betting, I'm applying for a patent, but something not for a dog sausage; we hear very much that the first-year-old will fall. Operam et oleum perdidi [2] if you recall from Tyrocinium. But a similar [!] won't be of any use grumbling, it's better not to spoil the paper and write pleasant news instead of unpleasant ones. Ecce homo! [3] behold, a man came into the world yesterday. Linde, Linde got a successor. We all enjoyed it, and I hope you will too. In our barracks something similar is often heard, as you know well from the last letter. It is loud that in two or three weeks they will give Freischütz; it seems to me that the Freischütz in Warsaw will make a lot of noise. There will probably be many representations, and rightly so. For it is a great deal when our famous Weber opera can put on a work. However, considering the goal Weber pursued in Freischütz, its German theme, that strange romanticism, the usually [!] sophisticated harmony that Germans particularly liked, it can be concluded that the Warsaw audience, accustomed to Rossini's light singing from the first introduction, did not as much from conviction as following the voice of experts, therefore he will praise that everywhere Weber is praised ... [illegible word]. Ecce femina, non homo [4] , the rector has a daughter. Perhaps, yesterday they said a son, today a daughter, but the latest news is truer. Yesterday we had a visit from our respectable husband, Mr. Kozicki, he gave one of the babies leeches and talked a lot about the canals passing [!], chewing, apple, adam's apple, because he performed operations on the apple. He was wearing colored stockings and boots, dirty as always, a plain waistcoat, but a new, or rather refurbished, hat. Be kind enough to let me know if you have received the notes. I haven't sent you my nonsense, but Aleksander Rembieliński's waltzes should please you, and if any one seemed too difficult to you at first, just start moving your rusty fingers (because you certainly haven't played anything in Biszofswerder) and you'll see that are worthy of your person, that is, as pretty as you are. Don't think that I wrote the last comma in the spirit of Pliny, habit works a lot here and a dog sometimes seems beautiful to its master... Hahaha... what a metamorphosis: you are a dog and a dog is a master!... it's only for a moment, because He has a dog more faithful than me. Podbielski is doing better, although after his case for the second time he had a scare; when I was crossing the street once, maybe a month ago, I noticed a beehive. Goat [!] that the carriage capsizes, I run, I find Podbielski on the land, who left home for the first time to get some fresh air; it was fortunate that someone was with him in a cab, and yet he barely put him into another. If you knew what varieties in our Botanical Garden, you would take care of your head. They made such flower beds, roads, plantations, bushes, etc., that it's nice to come in, especially since we have a key from it. If my handwriting seems a little savage to you, do not be surprised, for I am weak. If you don't find anything about holidays, don't be surprised, because next time I'll write you a letter. If I'm not sending you my clavier cymbal drivel, don't be surprised, because it's me. If you expect any wish from the house, read what follows. Both Mama and Papa, both sisters and friends, sincerely tell me to enclose a wish. Ludwika only does not wish you anything, because she has been staying in the village with Mrs. Skarbek for two weeks. Expected today or tomorrow. Domowicz was in Warsaw the other day. Alive healthy. Miss Dekert is weak. Bardziński gives a special bow. So live happily, dear Jasiu, I'm waiting for your letter. I hug you cordially. FFChopin. Your Pope, respect from the whole House. Miss Konstancja a kiss on the mouth from the Children and a kiss from me on the hand. If you see Szafarnia, Płona, Gulbiny, Radomin, Ornówek, mention my name, look at the potatoes and say sadly: ""Here once a brave man with a horse entered, here and Krapocka [?] came to his aid."" [1] Ad rem (Latin) - to the point. [2] Operam et oleum perdidi (Latin) - proverb: lost time and futile effort. [3] Ecce homo! (Latin) - here is a man, a man. [4] Ecce femina, non homo (Latin) - here is a woman, not a man."
"Dear Willie! Having passed Błonie, Sochaczew, Łowicz, Kutno, Kłodawa, Koło, Turek, Kalisz, Ostrów, Międzybórz, Oleśnica, Wrocław, Nimsch, Frankenstein, Warta and Glatz, we stopped at Reinertz, where we still stand. “I have been drinking whey and local waters for two weeks now; and supposedly, as they say, I'm supposed to look a little better, I'm supposed to get fat and thus lazy, to what perhaps you will attribute such a long rest of my pen; but believe me, when you learn of my way of life, you will admit that it is difficult to find a moment to sit at home. – In the morning, at 6 o'clock at the latest, all the sick are at the source; here is the poor wind music - composed of a dozen or so caricatures in various tastes, at the head of which a thin bassoonist with a saddled, smoked nose scares all the ladies who are afraid of horses, plays to the slow-walking Kur-gäst [1]; here is the type of redoubt, or rather a masquerade, because not all of them wear masks, but their number is small, because it consists only of those who let themselves be hanged for the sake of the company. – Such a promenade along the lovely avenue connecting Anstalt [2] with the city usually lasts until eight o'clock, according to how many cups one has to drink in the morning, then they go (each to his own place) for breakfast. – After breakfast, I usually go for a walk, I go to 12 o'clock, at which time you have to eat dinner because you go to Brunu's again after lunch [3] . After dinner, usually an even bigger masquerade than in the morning, because everyone dressed up, everyone in a different costume than in the morning! Again, the music sucks, and that's how it goes until the very evening. Like me, because I drink only two glasses of Lau-brun [4] after lunch, so I go home for supper, after supper I go to sleep, so when should I write a letter?... Well, you have a general day that goes down one by one. And it's coming down so fast that I've been here so long and I haven't seen it all. Although I walk in the mountains surrounded by Reinertz, often delighted with the view of the local valleys, I am reluctant to climb down, sometimes on all fours, but I have not yet been where everyone goes, because I was forbidden. There is a mountain with rocks called Heu-scheuer near Reinertz, a place from which stunning views, but not accessible to everyone due to the unhealthy air at the very top, and I am one of those patients, unfortunately, who are not allowed there. But never mind; I have already been to the mountain called Einsiedela, because there is a hermit. After going up one of the highest in Reinertz, you climb up a hundred and several dozen stairs in a straight line, almost vertically, made of stones, to the hermit himself, from where a delicious view of the whole Reinertz. We're going to some Hohemenze, it's also supposed to be a mountain in a delicious area; I expect it to come to fruition. But in vain do I bore you with these descriptions, from which you can get little idea of things, for not everything can be described as one wants. As for manners, I have become so accustomed to them that nothing now offends my eyes. “At first it was strange to me that in general in Silesia women work more than men, but since I am now doing nothing myself, it is easy for me to agree. There were many Poles in Reinertz, but now their number is dwindling; almost all who were, my acquaintances; fun among countrymen is quite cheerful, even the most important German families also apply themselves to all the amusements of the salon. In the house we live in, a lady from Wrocław lives; her children, lively, intelligent boys, speak a little French; they wanted to speak Polish, so one of them, and my friend, started to say to me: zien Dobry, I replied: good morning, and that I liked the boy, I told him how to say good evening; the next day it got so mixed up that instead of a good day it says to me: zien wiesiór. I did not know where the error came from, and I could scarcely explain to him that it was not tonight, but good evening. He scribbled so much for free for you unnecessarily, maybe you'd rather do something else during this time! But I'm also about to finish, I'm going to Brunu for two glasses of water and gingerbread, with which I will always stay the same F. Chopin. Dziewanowski wrote to me; I am thinking of writing back to him tomorrow. He writes to me that he also wrote to you; good boy, he didn't forget. Alfred Kornatowski was here with his parents and sisters; apparently it's knowledge of Fountain [!], say that he left the day before. Your papa, your mother, my respect. I don't know what I wrote to you there; I see a lot, but I can't read it. [1] Kur-gästom (from German Kurgäste) – patients. [2] Anstalt (German) - plant. [3] Brun (German: Brunnen) - source. [4] Lau-brun (from German) – warm spa water."
Dearest and best Lord Fryderyk! It was my greatest pleasure to write a letter to your dear Father on November 11th, concerning your health and charity for poor orphans. You will remember that I advised you to give a concert, and it really happened, and for such a glorious cause. I wish from my heart to embrace you soon in complete health and to kiss him from my heart, and I remain with true love and respect your faithful friend Wojciech Żywny.
"Dear Jasia! Before I looked back, those 3 months flew by; it seems that recently I sent you a note, meanwhile a fairy tale; I confess myself guilty, I confess that the quarter has aged since then. Merciful deed of the Lord that you deign to grant me this; His magnanimity reaches the clouds!... but what about mine, it's different. Anger I promise ... anger unbridled by nothing, except with a single piece of paper, which I'm waiting like a fool to this day. Glory to God, the 20th letter from Sokołów is written, today is the second one, and there is no second one. Don't you know what interests me above all your corn, potatoes, and horses? Consider! humble yourself! Seize the salutary remedy given above, a: petenti veniam dabo [1] . As for Brunner, the following verses explain: since a month like the choraleon is completely finished, and he had no news from your Papa, he took it apart and only now put it back together, when I told him that I would be glad to see it. He says that your Papa should be pleased that the koraleon has stayed here all this time, because he still invented some improvement (about which he talked to me a lot) which he supposedly used there. I haven't seen it yet, so I can't describe it to you exactly, but when I see it, I'll let you know by post. As for the money owed to him, he himself will give his opinion in the letter he is to write to Your Papa (because he received the letter written on the 20th). Therefore, what then? that's why you see the commissary alias this order most perfectly facilitated. Ask yourself, where did I get such an actvitas [2]? A short answer: from Sokołów, because I have become so fat, so pale, that in short, I don't want to do anything. Find out, my life, on this occasion that I don't go to high school. Because it would be foolish to sit for 6 hours a day, when German and German-Polish doctors told me to walk as much as possible; it would be foolish to hear the same thing a second time, when you can learn something else in a year. At the end of the day, I go to Elsner for exact counterpoint 6 hours a week; I listen to Brodziński, Bentkowski and other objects with any relation to music. I go to sleep at 9 o'clock. All the teas, evenings, balls have gone to shit. I drink emetic water on Malcz's order and oatmeal only grazes a quasi [3] horse. However, I don't like the air here as much as in Reinertz. They sing to me that maybe next year I'll have to repeat at least for the laubrunn ceremony, but that's far from it; and supposedly it would be better to go to Paris than to the Czech border. Bardziński is still leaving this year, and I... in 50 years maybe. What give Lord God. Give me a kiss, dear Jasiu, you'll get more by mail. FFChopin. The paper I'm writing you on is from Reinertz. To you Mr Zywny, Mrs Dekert, in a word, all my friends. Pope our bows, and I thank you for the gracious note. PP. Dziewanowski, Białobł., Cissaw. etc. I will write to Miss Konstancja from Ludwika and everyone. [1] Petenti veniam dabo (Latin) – I will forgive the one who asks. [2] Activitas (Latin) - here: mobility, activity. [3] Quasi (Latin) - supposedly."
"Dear Mr Jan! You're not worth it, Rogue! forgive me that I am compelled to use a word that belongs to you so justly! You're not worthy of me stretching out my hand with a pen to you! – Such is the gratitude for the bloody sweat of my majesty's brow, for the hardships and toils undertaken [!] when buying Mickiewicz or these tickets? ""Such a kindness for congratulating the New Year!"" – Yes, think about it; and you will admit that I am right in saying that you are not worthy of me stretching out my hand to you. – The only motive for writing today is to excuse myself from any suspicion or suspicion which might fall upon me on account of the money left with me. Perhaps you think that I used them for some friendly ball during the carnival, or that I used them to honor Bach worthy of the son of Apollo! – Wrong conclusions! Ugly thoughts! Fig! – Here I bought you two arias from Frejszyca with which you should be satisfied. They are for a female voice, they are sung by [!] Ku[r]pińska and Aszpergerowa, but I know, or at least I show myself how you have to sing thinly, my dear life, when your leg hurts (of which I know nothing) so they will be good for you. – Transpose them an octave below the singing itself, and you will have a tenor voice, like you have, as far as I remember. – They both cost PLN 2, so how much do I have left? – You have to do an arithmetic operation: – someone had, for example (picture Tarczyński on the first-class exam), someone had, for example, 3 zlotys; spent 2, how much is left? - huh? – Two from 3, it remains 1, so you have a golden one, i.e. gr. 30 or 90 shillings. – I would like to buy you something interesting with it, and it will certainly be from Italy, so that you also have something fashionable; nothing has been engraved yet, but what about tomorrow, because I haven't been to Brzezina for 4 days, maybe I'll get it and if I can, I'll try to let Mr Dziewanowski take it with him. Beautiful intention! you can see its effect when you unroll the notes; you should be as curious about the past now as I am about the future today! In addition, I am sending you my Mazurka, of which you know, later you can get another one, because it would be too much fun at once. Already released into the world; while mine is Rondo, which I wanted to let lithograph, which is earlier, and therefore has a greater right to travel, soul in papers. ""It's the same with him as it is with me!"" Sanna is quite good, they have been flying around Warsaw with bells for 4 days now; there have even been a few cases, usually accompanying similar times; for example, a drawbar hit a lady on the head and killed her; the horses scattered, the sledge broke, and so on. The masquerade on New Year's Eve was to be very numerous. Nor have I ever been to such a party; so I feel like and I hope that we will go with Bardziński this year. – Mrs. Szymanowska is giving a concert this week. It is supposed to be on Friday and the price is increased; supposedly the ground floor half a ducat, armchairs a ducat and the like. – I will be sure and let you know about the party and the game. Write to me! ""Give me a kiss, Lube Life."" FFChopin. Our mother is weak; four days lies; suffers badly from rheumatism, now whatever is better, expect that the Lord God will give perfectly well. Your Pope, respect from us."
"Dear Jasia! Are you alive? - Or not? – Thank God, it's been over 3 months now that you haven't written a word to me. – My worthy name day passed, I did not receive the letter. All this, it seems, confirms what they talk about you with tears and regret in Warsaw. ""And you know what they say, they say you're dead!"" We've all bleated about it (in vain), Jędrzejewicz was already writing a panegyric for ""Kuryer"", when suddenly the news that you are alive again came out! Yes, you are alive! - Since comforting tidings more easily cling to hearts desirous of consolation, the last things people said seemed to us more like the truth. So, drying my eyelids swollen with tears, I took up my pen, asking you whether you are alive or dead! If you're dead, tell me, I'll tell the cook, because since she found out about it, she kept saying her prayers. – But what can Cupid's arrow do; although she is an old woman, our Józef, you captured her so much while in Warsaw that she kept repeating for a long time (after learning about your death): ""What a Panic it was! prettier than all the panics out there; neither Mr. Woyciechowski so pretty, nor Mr. Jędrzejewicz, nor none, none. - My God! how he once, for a prank, ate cabbage from the market!”... Ha, ha, ha, ha! Famous Trains! It is a pity that Mickiewicz is not there, maybe he would write the ballad Kucharka. “But having given all this peace, I come to the point: we have a disease at home. Emilia has been in bed for 4 weeks now, she coughed, started spitting up blood, her mother got scared. Malcz then ordered blood to be drawn. They let go once... twice; innumerable leeches, vesicatories, synapses, wolf's bastards, brawls, brawls!... All this time she had eaten nothing; she was so haggard as to be unrecognizable, and now something is beginning to come to her senses. You can imagine what we had. Imagine yourself, because I can't describe it to you. Now about something else. “Carnival is over, and sadly. Old Benik died, so you can guess what it cost Papa! – His daughter Klementyna, who married Dobyshev, not even living with him for nine months, died. “In a word, such sad events alone saddened our house. – The last addition was the one from hell, because I don't know from where, the news of your death, which cost me not only tears, but also money. – Naturally, having learned about it (imagine that you learn about my death) – (NB I am alive) – I got a headache from a big beep, and that it was at 8 am, and at 11 am the Italian comes, so I had no lessons. – Just a few zlotys (Woyciechowski, Weltz worried); the next day, in order to entertain myself, I was told to go to the theatre. Few dollars again! – but you could also write to me if you died, I'm waiting for a letter, because I can't write anymore, because it's 4 o'clock. Give me a kiss, dear Jalu. FFChopin. Brunner thinks soon to send the corallion back down the Vistula; write whether he should abstain or what, because the German does not know what to do. It would be best if your Papa wrote to him. Everyone hugs you after the resurrection. Papa my respect."
"Beloved Parents and you, dear sisters. When my health serves me like a dressed dog, and Mr. Zboiński's yellow eyes drop when we leave for Płock, it would be madness if I did not report it on my part. – So today in Płock, tomorrow in Rościszewo, the day after tomorrow in Kikół, a few days in Turzno, a few days in Kozłów, and in a moment in Gdańsk, and back! Maybe someone will tell me: ""you can see that he is in a hurry to get home when he mentions it."" No, no, not at all, you are very wrong Wasińdziej or Waska, because I only wrote it to arouse the pleasant feeling that we usually experience when greeting. ""Who would miss it!... I don't."" Maybe someone else misses you, but not me!... - There is no letter from Warsaw with all this; today in Płock I will turn over all the mail, if there is something for me there. How is it in this new apartment? How are they already frying towards examen? Tytus sighs at the countryside?... Pruszak, same?... How did Mr. Skarbek eat his dinner there, on the 3rd, what was it that I had in the project to go to the countryside with him?... Everything is as curious as Baba. But what can they do, they won't give the dog meat, the dog fasts, and what can it do but go here and there and look for food? I'm also going to Płock for meat, because I guess you didn't know that the last post office in Summer is waiting. Now it's time to go back to writing for a long time! so I won't bother, because it's hard to know where to look for me, but what am I, regularly, almost every step, I will write and let you know where to address, so that I get it. – But as Mr. Zboiński claims, you can write via Toruń, Schwetz to Kozłów, so that we will find a note when we arrive. Nice thought: I expect her to be adopted (for Izabela). – I wanted to send you my waltz, sister, but I have no time to write, because we are already boarding; it is now morning, 8 o'clock (because we never get up before 7). The air is fresh, the sun is shining beautifully, the birds are chirping, there is no brook, because it purrs, but there is a pond and the frogs sing beautifully! - But the funniest thing is the blackbird that sings in front of the windows of the fight, and after the blackbird, the youngest Kamilka of Mr. Zboiński, who is not yet two years old, likes me and chatters that ""Kagila pana koteć"". As she me, so I, a billion times, to kiss Papa and Mama, Mama and Papa and respect them, and kiss their feet and hands. The most affectionate F. Chopin. Sisters of kisses, kisses, kisses. To everyone, Tytus, Prus[zak], Bartoch., Jęd[rzejewicz] everything."
Dear Jasia! What is it that we haven't seen each other in so long? – Every day I expect you, but I see that you do not come out of spite, especially since I have the following business for you: Since the weather is bad now, I would like to write piano for the Variations cleanly. For that I need your copy, so be kind enough to bring it to me tomorrow, and the day after tomorrow you will both receive your FFChopin.
"Dearest Titus! You won't believe with what eagerness I awaited the news of you and your Mama; so you can imagine how happy I was when I got the letter. At that time, I was in Sanniki with the Pruszaks. I spent the whole summer there. – I am not writing you anything about the fun there, you were also in Sanniki. - I couldn't write you back immediately because I dial home every day. And now I write, but like a madman, because I really don't know what is happening to me. I'm going to Berlin today. For one opera by Spontini; I'm going by stagecoach to try my hand. The reason for all this, however, is the monkeys in all European cabinets. Following the example of congresses in the cantons of Switzerland, and later in Münich, the king of Prussia gave his University the power to invite the most important scientists of Europe to the sessions of natural scientists to be held under the chairmanship of that famous Humboldt. Jarocki, as a former student of the Academy. in Berlin, and later received a doctorate there, as a zoologist, he received a similar invitation. 200 apartments in Berlin reserved for the arriving naturalists, a communal table, etc., similar German regulations, as well as the vellum paper on the printed invitation, promise something great, and thus that Spontini will also perform with Cortez or Olympia. Anyway, Jarocki's friend and teacher, Lichtenstein, and the secretary of that assembly, was closely connected with Weber, is a member of the Singing Academy and in good harmony (as Ernemann told me) with Zelter, the president of this musical establishment. People who knew Berlin well told me that knowing Liechtenstein I would meet Berlin's most important musicians, with the exception of Spontini, with whom he supposedly died. I would be glad to find Radziwiłł Poznański there (which God's world doubts), this brother of Spontini. I will be there for two weeks only with Jarocki, but it's good to hear an excellent opera once; one can already have an idea of a higher execution. Arnold, Mendelson and Hank[e] piano players there. The last one was a student of Hummel. What I see, I will write to you when I return, and now, at your request, I will write you the news of Warsaw. 1-mo Mr. Colli and Mrs. Tusaint performed in The Barber (a few weeks ago). It happened that I came to Warsaw from Sanniki for a few days with Kostuś. I was extremely curious to see that one act (because only the first act was played) in Italian; I was rubbing my hands all day. - But for the evening, if it wasn't for Mr. Tusa, I would have killed Colle. Such was the arlechino italiano [1], he falsified so much that fear. Suffice it to say that once, flying out, he fell over. Imagine Colle in shorts, with a guitar, in a round white hat, on the ground. – Oh, horror! – The Barber was going badly. Zdanowicz sang the calumnia best. – There was, or was supposed to be played, the opera Telemak, a novelty that I had not seen; I know there have been rehearsals, I haven't been to any, so I can't tell you anything about it. – Otella, it seems to me that you have not yet seen and that you yourself praised Polkowski, who performs best in this opera. Meyer, as usual, sings. Zimmermannowa is already playing and is said to be beginning her education. But enough about the drama, know something about the University. Oborski (who scared me with your departure, bursting into the hall where we had gathered to sing the choirs of Corpus Christi, and saying with some madness that you told me to say goodbye, that you had to leave at night), Oborski is said to be in Baden. – That's what Gąsie told me (with whom I was yesterday on the tower of the Lutheran church, from where we watched the revue at Wola Street). Gąsie was in Krakow, he has a lot to tell; they stole it on the way, fondly this case exposes. Today I met Obniski, he is healthy, he asked a lot about you, where you were, when and if you would return, and he asked to hug you from him. – Pruszak, having dropped me off on Thursday, returned home on Saturday to go to Gdańsk on Sunday. Mrs. Pruszak left the day before. I was with Kostuś in your lodgings, but I didn't try the piano, because Kostus didn't know where to look for the key; I didn't think there was anything wrong with him, he looked good. You will learn everything about your things, whether they have already been moved or not, from Kostya, who will probably write to you. In Sanniki, I reworked the Rondo in C major (the last one, if you remember) for 2 pianos, today I tried it with Ernemann at Bucholtz's and it turned out quite well. We think of it when playing on Resursa. ""As for my new compositions, I have nothing but the not quite finished Trio in g-minor, begun shortly after your departure."" – I tried the first Allegro with accompaniment before leaving for Sanniki, I think I'll try the rest after returning. I think this Trio will suffer a similar fate as my Sonata and Variations. They are already in Leipzig, the first one, as you know, is attributed to Elsner, on the second ones (perhaps too bold) I wrote your name. (The heart wanted it so, friendship didn't forbid it, and don't take it too badly.) Skarbek hasn't come back yet. Jędrzejewicz will stay in Paris for a year. He got acquainted with Sowiński, the piano player, who wrote me a few words. declares that before coming to Warsaw, he would be glad to know in advance by letter that being a member of the editorial office of the Parisian daily ""Revue Musicale"", publiée par [2] Mr. Fétis, it would be nice for him to have some news about the state of music in Poland, about famous Poles of this kind, about their lives, etc., which I don't think of interfering with. I will write back to him from Berlin that such things do not belong to me, especially since Kurpiński has already begun to deal with it here. Besides, I do not yet have a judgment worthy of a Parisian journal, where the truth itself should be located; that I have never heard a better or worse opera. I would have hurt so many! – Kurpiński now in Krakow, Żyliński conducts the opera; yesterday Freyszyc was supposed to be played horribly. The choirs a quarter later sang one after the other. Papa says I'm going to lose that great reputation abroad. I'll let you know for sure in a month. For at the end of this month I will leave Berlin. Five days by stagecoach! When I get sick, I go home by extra mail. And I will write to you about it. – From important news, I forgot that Albrecht died. With us, everything is the old way, good-natured Zywny is the soul of all the fun. This year I was supposed to be in Vienna with Papa in a stagecoach and maybe it would have happened, but Niezabytowski's mother told him to wait for her and did not come. Papa spent the whole summer at home. In the old days, that is, 2 and 3 months ago, I was sorry to pass by Rezler's tenement house, and the other day, going to Brzezina, I entered the door to Lafor instead of the hall. “I only met Mrs. Castel yesterday. I find her similar to him. Everyone in Warsaw thinks so. – I am very sorry that the moments you spend with Mom are not as free as they were last year. We all strongly felt the weakness of your esteemed Mother and we all together wish to improve her health. You must have had frequent hiccups, for not a day went by that you were not mentioned. I'm finishing, because my piston (Hartman's work) has already gone to the post office. I'm already going to where Geysmer and Lauber are sitting, I'll bow to them from you if you want. Now give a kiss to the most affectionate F. Chopin. Kiss your mother's feet and hands from me. My parents and siblings send respect and heartfelt wishes for better health. All your acquaintances, such as: P. Żywyny, Żoch, Górski, etc., these few people will remind you of our home. - Kisses again - kisses. Why, have mercy and write a word sometimes, even half a word, even a letter, and that will be dear to me. Forgive me if I wrote something stupid, but I don't have time to read it. - Adieu again. [1] Arlechino italiano (Italian) – Italian jester. [2] Publiée par (French) - published by."
"My Beloved Parents and Sisters! On Sunday, around 3 o'clock in the afternoon, we arrived at this big city. From the post office we were taken straight to the inn ""Pod Kronprinzem"" and we are still standing there. We are good and comfortable here. On the first day of our arrival Mr. Jarocki took me to Liechtenstein; and there I saw Humboldt. Liechtenstein told me that he would introduce me to the first masters of my art, regretting that we had not arrived the day before, for that very morning his daughter was playing with the accompaniment. Never mind that last one, I thought to myself. What did he guess? I do not know yet, for I have never seen her, much less heard her. On the Sunday we arrived, Winter's Sacrifice Interrupted was playing. Mr. Lichtenstein's visit did not allow me to be there. Yesterday there was a common dinner of those (for me caricatures) scholars, whom I have already divided into three classes, not under the leadership of Humboldt (because he is very well-mannered), but some other Chopmaster, whose name I do not remember at the moment, but I have written down under a portrait I made of him. This dinner, which dragged on for an unusually long time, prevented me from attending a concert by the nine-year-old Birnbach, a violinist quite praised here. Today I'm going to see Ferdinand Cortez, Spontini's famous opera; so, in order not to end up with caricatures again, I asked Mr. Jarocki to let me eat dinner separately. Which having done so, I set about writing this letter, after which I am going to the opera. Rumor has it that Paganini, the famous violinist, is coming here; maybe it will work. Radziwiłł is expected on the 20th of this month; it would be good if he came. So far I have seen nothing but the zoological office, but I know most of the city, for these two days I have only roamed and chatted on the more beautiful streets and bridges. I will not bother to list the major buildings, when I return I will tell you; and my general opinion about Berlin: that it is too wide for the Germans, it seems that even twice as many people could easily fit in it. At first we were supposed to live on Französische Strasse, but it has changed, which I am very happy about, because this street is extremely sad; barely six people can be seen together. Probably its width, equaling our Leszno, is the reason for this. Only today will I know what Berlin is in my sense. I would rather sit at Schlesinger's in the morning than wander around the 13 rooms of the zoological office. It is beautiful, but the musical composition of the above-mentioned one would be useful for something more. But the sanctuary doesn't hurt my head - I'll be there too. This morning I also visited two piano factories; Kisling lives at the end of Friedrichstrasse; he had none finished, he labored in vain. – It is a good thing that here, in the host's house, there is a piano and that I can play it. Our innkeeper admires me every day, since I visit him (or rather his instrument). On the way, it wasn't as bad as it might have seemed at first – and although there was a lot of pepper in the stave Prussian stagecoaches, it turned out to be good for me, as I can see, because I am healthy and very healthy. Our traveling company consisted of one lawyer, a German, residing in Poznan, and distinguished by heavy German jokes, and a fat Prussian, an agronomist, whom the stagecoaches (for he traveled a lot) had educated. Such was our company until the last station before Frankfurt, where some German Korinna arrived, full of ahs, jaows, nays, in short, a real romantic ass. But it was fun, too, especially since she was angry with her neighbor, the lawyer, the whole way. The surroundings of Berlin from this side are not the most beautiful, but they delight with order, cleanliness, selection of things, in a word, a certain prudence that can be seen in almost every corner. I haven't been from other parts of the city yet; I can't be there today, maybe tomorrow. The sittings for which Mr. Lichtenstein has promised to give me an entry card are already starting the day after tomorrow. Humboldt's reception of the explorers of nature is to be held that evening. Mr. Jarocki wanted to see to it that I was admitted there, but I begged him not to do so, because it would not be of much use to me, and then other foreign heads might look at me askance if they saw a profanity among themselves. Besides, I never want to be out of place. And so already at the table, it seems to me, my neighbor looked at me askance. It was a botany professor from Hamburg, Mr. Lehmann. I envied his fingers. I broke the roll with both hands, he crumpled it into a cake with one. Such a frog had paws like a bear. He talked to Mr. Jarocki through me, and during the conversation he was so forgetful, so enthusiastic that he fumbled around my plate with his fingers and swept away the crumbs. (He's a real scholar, because his nose was big and ungainly.) I was on pins and needles while sweeping my plate, and then had to polish it with a napkin. Marylski doesn't have an ounce of taste when he says that berlins are beautiful: they are all bare jaws, alias mouths without teeth. And they dress up, it's true, but it's a waste of those cut delicious muslins for such irsza dolls. Your sincerely loving Frederick."
" am in good health, and starting from Tuesday, as if intentionally for me, they put on something new every day at the theatre. What is more, I have already heard one Oratorio in the Singacademia, Cortez, Cimarosa's Il matrimonio segreto, Onslow's Colporter I listened with satisfaction. Handel's oratorio Cäcilienfest, however, came closer to the ideal I had formed of great music. Of the female singers, there are none of them now, apart from Miss Tibaldi (alto) and the young, 17-year-old von Schätzel, whom I heard first in the Singacademy and then in the theater, in Kolporter. I liked the Oratorio more; perhaps I was better disposed to listen. However, there was also a but; probably won't be in Paris. I have not been to Lichtenstein's since then, because he is so busy with the arrangement of sessions that Mr. Jarocki can only exchange a few words with him. Despite this, he managed to get me a ticket to enter the meetings. The place was excellent, I had heard and seen what was possible, I even had a good look at the kronprinz. I saw Spontini, Zelter, Mendelssohn, but I didn't speak to any of them, because I didn't dare recommend myself. X. Radziwiłł is to come today; I'll go find out after breakfast. I saw Duchess Lignicka at the Singacademy, and seeing someone dressed in livery talking to her, I asked my neighbor if he was the royal butler? ""Ei, das ist ja Excellenz von Humboldt"" [1], he replied. The ministerial uniform changed him so much that, despite the facial features of this great piéton [2] (because he used to roam all the way to Cimborasso), I could not recognize him at all. Yesterday, too, he was at Kolporter, or, as they call it here, Hausirera, and in our language, I believe, at Kramarz, in the royal box, Prince Charles. The other day we visited the library. Huge, but very few musical works. There I saw Kościuszko's handwritten letter written by Falkenstein, our hero's biographer. When he noticed that we were Poles, that we read the letter smoothly, which he painstakingly painted, he asked Mr. Jarocki to translate the content in German, writing it down by dictation in his pocketbook. He is still quite a young man; he has the office of secretary at the Dresden library. I also saw the editor of a Berlin music newspaper there, and I had a few words with him. Tomorrow Freischutz! ... that's what I need. I will be able to make comparisons with our singers. Today I received a ticket for a joint dinner at Exercirhaus. There are more caricatures now. [1] Ei, das ist... Humboldt (German) - this is Excellency von Humboldt. [2] Pi?ton (French) - infantryman."
" am well, I saw what could be seen. I'm coming back to you. On Monday (that's the day after tomorrow next week) we'll hug each other. I use a vagabond. I don't do anything but go to the theatre. Yesterday was: Das unterbrochene Opferfest, where many a chromatic gamma, released by Miss Schätzel, brought me to your bosom. Yours reminded me of a Berlin caricature. A drawing of a Napoleonic soldier stands by the guardhouse, with a rifle, and asks: ""qui vive?"" [1], and a fat German woman as she walks replies: ""la vache"" [2]. She wanted to say ""die Wäscherin""[3], but wanting it to be more elegant and to make it easier for the French soldier to understand her, she Frenchized her dignity! Among the more important scenes of the stay, I can count the second dinner with gentlemen naturalists. On Tuesday, the eve of the crossover, there was a dinner with songs adapted to the circumstances. What lived, sang, and whatever sat at the table, drank and clinked to the music. Zelter conducted; beside it, on a crimson plinth, stood a large gilded chalice as a sign of the highest musical dignity. They ate more than usual; The reason for this is as follows: Gentlemen nature researchers, and especially zoologists, dealt mainly with the formation of meat, sauces, broth, etc. things, so during these few days of sessions they made so much progress in eating. Scholars have already been mocked at the Königstädter Theater by drinking beer in some comedy (which I haven't been to, but I know from a story) and asking one another: ""Why is the beer in Berlin so good now?"" - ""Oh, because the researchers of nature have arrived"" - he replied. But it's time to go to bed because we have to be at the post office early in the morning. We will stay in Poznań for two days, in gratiam [4] of the dinner to which Archbishop Wolicki invited us. We'll talk about it when we see each other! Goodbye… [1] Qui vive? (fr.) - who's going? [2] La vache (French) – a cow. [3] Die Wäscherin (German) – laundress. [4] In gratiam (Latin) – because of, because of."
"Dearest Titus. I was lazy until the feeling of friendship overcame the addiction. Wanting you to have this letter at home on January 1st and 4th, although you are sleepy, I took to writing. I will not burden you with a lot of compliments, sophisticated wishes, often vulgar ideas, because you know me and I know you; in this look for the reason for silence. Max gave me detailed information about you and your mother's health the day after his arrival in Warsaw. On his way to the University, he dropped by right away and remembered the pages of Hrubieszów with great enthusiasm. Some of his descriptions, among others, about your neighbor who came back from Paris, when I asked him, ""hair curls"", he replied in a short serious accent. – Mrs. Pruszak is going to have a comedy again; I was given some part of Pedro in Les projets de mariage par Duval. After the new year, they leave for two weddings, one of Miss Skarżyńska (from Krakow) with Łuszczewski, and the other of Miss Skarżyńska from Studzieniec, nb. the oldest, with I don't know who. I know you'll nod your head at this point and tell me what nonsense Fryc is telling me, but I've already written it, I won't erase it, because I don't have time to copy it. – News from another village that Jędrzejewicz in Paris became a member of some society, supposedly geographical. – But what will occupy you the most is that I, poor man, have to give lessons. The reason for this is as follows. N. lia fatto infelice la signorina governante, della Casa, nella strada Marszałkowska. La signorina governante [h]a uno bambino nell'ventre, e la Contessa sive la padrona non vuole vedere di piu il seduttore. II migliore evento é, che credevano avanti, che tutto e apparito, ch'il seducente son and o perche i o ch'era piu d'un messo a Saniki, e semper andava colla governante camminar nell'giardino. I have andar'e camminar'e niente di piu. Ella non e incantante. Incompetent io, non ho avuto alcuno apetito [1] fortunately for me. Madama Pruszak persuaded Mom and Papa to give lessons. – Oleum et operam perdidi. [2] But let it be what they will. Rondo ? la Krakowiak finished in the partition. Original introduction, more than me with a fabulous frock coat. But the Trio isn't finished yet. Upstairs there is already a room that is supposed to serve me for comfort, stairs leading to it from the dressing room. There I am to have an old piano, an old desk, there is to be a corner of refuge for me. The orphaned Rondo for 2 pantaloons found a stepfather in Fontana (you may have seen him at my place, he goes to the University), he studied for over a month, but he learned, and recently we experienced the effect that it could have at Bucholtz. Maybe, because they didn't quite dress up the pantaloons, the feeling and all those little things, you know, how much shade they give each thing, wasn't always good. He hasn't written anything for a week, neither for men nor for God. I fly from Anasz to Kaifasz and today I'm at Wincengerodowa's for the evening, from where I'm going for the second one to Miss Kicka. You know how comfortable it is when you want to sleep and they ask you to improvise. Goodbye everyone! - Rarely will there be a thought like that which so easily fell under my fingers in your pantalion in the morning! - Where to go, Leszczynski's wretched instrument, for I have not seen a single one that would come close in voice to your Sister's pantalion or to ours. – Yesterday, the Polish theater started with Precioza, and the French one with Rataplan. Today Geldhab, tomorrow Locksmith. Me tomorrow, as on Sunday, at P. Pruszak's for dinner. Kostuś told me that you wrote to him, don't think that I'm frowning that you didn't write to me; I know your soul, I don't stand for paper; and if he has already scrawled your back without meaning, it is only to remind you that I have you in my heart as before, that I am the same Fryc as before. F. Chopin. You don't like being kissed. Let me do it today. Best health to your mother from all over the house. - Hug your brother. The living bows to you. On September 9, in Sanniki, at the Pruszaków, I adapted the Rondo in C major for 2 pianos (not yet published). G-minor trio not quite finished. [1] N. lia fatto... apetito (Italian) – N. made the governess unhappy in the house at ul. Marszałkowska. The maiden has a child in her tummy, and the countess, that is, the lady of the house, does not want to see the seducer again. But the best thing was that previously it was thought that I really did seem to be the seducer, because I was in Sanniki for more than a month and always went out to the garden with the governess. But I was going for a walk and nothing else. She is not delightful. I, the infirm, had no appetite. (Jach., p. 35.) There are several spelling errors in the original, the syntax is faulty. [2] Oleum et operam perdidi (Latin) - I just lost my time."
"My dearest parents and sisters. Happily, cheerfully, healthily, perfectly, almost comfortably, we stood yesterday in Vienna. From Krakow we traveled by separatwagen [1] better than we could have traveled in our own carriage. The beautiful surroundings of Galicia up to Bilsk, later Upper Silesia and Moravia, made the journey all the more pleasant for us because the rain, falling only at night, freed us from the wicked dust on the chossée. Before I start describing Vienna, let me tell you what happened to Ojców. On Sunday, after dinner, having hired a four-horse cart from Krakow for 4 thalers, we paraded around in it as best as possible. Having passed the city and the beautiful environs of Krakow, we ordered our coachman to go straight to Ojców, thinking that Mr. Indyk, a peasant with whom everyone usually stayed overnight, also lived there, where Miss Tańska also stayed. Misfortune wanted Mr. Indyk to live a mile from Ojcow, and our coachman, unaware of the road, drove into Prądnik, a river, a rather transparent stream, and it was impossible to find another way, because there were rocks to the right and to the left. About 9 o'clock in the evening, we were met by two people, so nomadic and not knowing what to do; these, taking pity on us, undertook to preside over Mr. Indyk. We had to walk a good half a mile through the dew, through lots of rocks and sharp stones. Often the river had to be crossed on round beams, and all this in the dark of the night. Finally, after many hardships, nudges and fuss, we finally found Mr. Indyk. He hadn't expected guests so late. He gave us a room under a rock, in a house built specifically for tourists. Izabella!... where Miss Tańska was standing! So each of my colleagues undresses and dries by the fire kindled in the fireplace by the kind Mrs. Indyk. I'm just sitting in a corner, wet up to my knees, meditating whether to undress and dry myself or not; until here I see Mrs. Indykowa approaching a nearby storage room for bedding. Touched by a salutary spirit, I follow her and notice a lot of woolen Cracow hats. These caps are double, like nightcaps. Desperate, I buy one for a zloty, tear it in two, take off my shoes, wrap my legs around them, and having tied them well with strings, I free myself from the inevitable cold. Approaching the fireplace, I drank wine, laughed with my good friends, and meanwhile Mrs. Indykowa sent us on the ground, where we had a good night's sleep... [The rest of this letter is given by Karasowski only in the summary: ""Next, Fryderyk describes Ojców, Pieskowa Skała, Czarna i Królewska, where once, at the end of the 13th century, according to a folk tale, King Łokietek was hiding from his enemies. Fryderyk is hovering over all this, saying in delight: ""that even for nothing, it was worth getting wet for this real beauty of Ojców"". Terf's letter is finally filled with a description of a Viennese picture gallery, which he hastily visited, and other details less likely to interest the readers.”] [1] Separatwagen (German) – extra post."
" am well and happy. I don't know what it is, but the Germans are surprised to me, and I am surprised to them that they should be surprised. Thanks to Mr. Elsner's letter, Haslinger did not know where to put me. He immediately ordered his son to play in front of me, he showed what he had the most interesting in terms of music, and apologized that he could not introduce his wife, because she was not at home. With all that, he hasn't printed my stuff yet. I didn't ask him about them, but showing me his most beautiful edition, he said that my Variations would also be published in Odeon in a week's time. Anim expected this. “He encourages me to play in public. The locals say that Vienna would lose a lot if I left without being heard. These are all incomprehensible things to me. Schuppanzigh, to whom I also had letters, told me that although he was giving no more winter quartets, he would try to organize at least one during my stay in Vienna. I was at the Hussarzewskis once; the old man was enthusiastic about my playing and asked for dinner. There were a lot of Viennese people at the dinner, and as if he colluded with them, they all made me play in public. Stein wanted to give me one of his instruments immediately for home and then for a concert if I gave it. Graff, who, however, is a better manufacturer than he, told me the same thing. Würfel maintains that in order to show something new and make noise, it is necessary to play. The local journalist, Mr. Blahetek, whom I met at Haslinger's, also orders me to appear. They really like the variations. Count Gallenberg recognized me there; he manages a theater where I've already heard a few miserable concerts. Haslinger maintains that it will be better for my compositions if Vienna hears them, that the newspapers will soon write flattering, for which everyone swears. In a word, whoever hears me tells me to play, and Würfel added this remark that when I am once in Vienna and my things are to go out soon, so that I must come forward, otherwise I would probably have to come deliberately. He assures that now is the most appropriate time, because the Viennese are hungry for new music. It is not right for a young artist to pass up such an opportunity. Anyway, if I acted only as an executor, it would mean less, but I appear with my works, so I can dare, etc. He wants me to play Variations first, then Rondo from Krakowiak, to strike with novelty, and finally, to improvise . Will it come to what? I don't know yet. Stein is very polite and friendly to me, but I couldn't play his instrument, rather Graff; it is also followed by Haslinger, Blahetka and Würfel. Today I decide. Everywhere I turn, they all clatter my head to play. I've had enough of musical acquaintances; Only I don't know Czerny yet, but Haslinger promised to introduce me to him. – I saw three operas: The White Lady, Cinderella and Meyerber's Teutonic Knight. Excellent orchestra and choirs. Today Joseph in Egypt. At the Academy of Music, I heard Mayseder playing solo twice. – The city is nice, I like it; they urge me to stay here for the winter. 'Würfel has arrived at this moment, I'm going with him to Haslinger. PS I have already decided, Blahetka says that I will make a sensation, because I am a virtuoso of the first caliber; that I must be counted among Moscheles, Herz, and Kalkbrenner. Würfel presented me today to Mr. Gallenberg, kapellmeister Seyfried and everyone he met, as a young man whom he persuaded to give a concert (by the way, without any fee), which was very much appreciated by Count. Gallenberg liked it because it's about his pocket. The newsboys all look at me with big eyes; the members of the orchestra bow low, because the director of the Italian opera, which no longer exists, leads me arm in arm. Indeed, Würfel made everything easier for me; he will be at the rehearsal himself and is genuinely concerned with my speech. He was good to me in Warsaw; He remembers Elsnera most fondly. They wonder how Kessler, Ernemann and Czapek can stay in Warsaw while I am there. But I explain to them that I play bloss aus Musikliebe [1] and that I don't give lessons. I chose a Graff instrument for the concert; I fear to offend Stein by this, but I shall thank him profusely for his kindness. I hope God will help me - be calm! [1] Bloss aus Musikliebe (German) - just for the love of music."
"From the last letter you know, dearest parents, that I was persuaded to give a concert; So yesterday, that is Tuesday, in the evening at 7 o'clock at the imperial-royal theater of the opera, I performed for the world! Yesterday's performance in the theater is called here eine musikalische Akademie. Since I had none of it and I didn't try to have it, so hr. Gallenberg hastened this speech by arranging the following order: Beethoven's Overture My Variations Miss Veltheim's Singing My Rondo. Singing again, followed by a little ballet to fill the evening. During the rehearsal, the orchestra provided so bad accompaniment that I changed Rondo to Freie Phantasie. He showed himself to the skins on stage, I got applause; after playing each variation there was such applause that I could not hear the tutti [1] of the orchestra. When I finished there was so much clapping that I had to go out and bow a second time. Freie Phantasie, although I was not so successful, nevertheless the applause was even stronger and it was necessary to show myself on stage again. I did better on it because the Germans know how to appreciate it. The idea conceived on Saturday Würfel brought to fruition on Tuesday, and I owe him a lot. On Saturday I met Gyrowetz, Lachner, Kreutzer, Seyfried; I had a long talk with Mayseder. Standing in front of the theater, I see Mr. Gallenberg; he approaches me and proposes to play on Tuesday; I agreed and they didn't boo me! When I arrive, I will tell everything better than I could write. Be at peace for my person and for my fame. Journalists liked me; maybe they'll pin a patch, but that's the need to shade the praise. Gallenberg liked my compositions. The theater director, Mr. Demar, is extremely polite and good to me. Before entering the stage, he emboldened me so much with his assurances, he made my mind so distracted that I had no great fear, especially since the hall was not full. My friends and colleagues stood in corners to listen to various opinions and criticisms. Celiński can say how few rebukes were heard: only Hube heard the greatest. A lady said, ""Schade um den Jungen, dass er so wenig Tournüre hat"" [2]. If that's all I've been reprimanded for, and they swear they've heard nothing but praise, and never applauded, then I have nothing to worry about! I improvised on the subject of The White Lady, and at the request of the director, who really liked my Rondo at the rehearsal, so that yesterday after the concert, squeezing my hand tightly, he said: ""Ja, dass ""Rondo"" muss hier gespielt werden"" [3] - so that I would take still a Polish theme, I chose Chmiel, which electrified the audience, unaccustomed to such songs. My ground-floor spies swear that people jumped on the benches. Wertheim happened to come from Karlsbad yesterday with his wife and went straight to the theater, but he could not realize that it was I who was playing; he was with me today with congratulations. He had seen Hummel in Karlsbad; he says that Hummel mentioned me to him and that he will write to him to-day reporting my appearance. – Haslinger prints; concert poster hidden. However, the common opinion is that I played too weakly, or rather too delicately, for the local artists, accustomed to breaking pianos. I expect this accusation in the journal, especially since the editor's daughter is a terrible instrument player. That's okay; because you can't have no buts, and I'd rather have them than be told I'm playing too hard. Yesterday, Mr. Dietrichstein, a person close to the emperor, spoke a lot of French with me; praised and encouraged to stay longer in Vienna. The orchestra thundered at my badly written notes and frowned until the improvisation, after which it also applauded to applause and cheers from the entire audience. I see that I have it behind me, I don't know anything about other artists yet; they should not be hostile, because they know that I did not play for material gain. So my first speech, as much as it was unexpected, was as happy. Hube says that a man will never achieve anything by the usual way and according to his own plan, something must be left to fate. So, by luck, I was persuaded to go to the concert. If I'm so whipped in the newspapers that I can't show myself to the world any more, I've decided to paint rooms, because it's easiest to draw a brush through paper, and you're always Apollo's son. I wonder what Mr. Elsner will say about all this; maybe he doesn't like me playing? But they made me so intoxicated that I could not speak out. It seems to me that I have done nothing wrong. Nidecki showed me a great deal of friendship yesterday; he reviewed, corrected the orchestral voices, and sincerely enjoyed the applause. – I played Graff's instrument. Today I am wiser and more experienced by about 4 years. Ah! You must have marveled that I sealed the letter with Madeira; but I was so absent-minded that I took the first waiter's stamp that lay at hand, and hastily sealed the letter. [1] Tutti (Italian) - everyone; here: all. [2] Schade... hat (German) – it's a pity that this young man is so inconspicuous [3] Ja... werden (German) – yes, Rondo should be played here."
"If ever, I'd love for us to be together now. Today I met Mr. Lichnowski; he could not praise me enough; Würfel led me to him. This is the same one that was Beethoven's greatest friend. The general voice maintains that I am liked by the nobles here. The Schwarzenbergs, Wrbnys, etc. praised the delicacy and elegance of my playing; proof of this Mr. Dietrichstein, who was on stage with me. Mrs. Lichnowska and her daughter, with whom I had tea today, are infinitely happy that next Tuesday I will give a second concert. She told me that when I went through Vienna to Paris, so that I would not forget to be with them, they would give me a letter to some comtessa, the sister of Lichnowski himself. Many courtesies. Czerny complimented me a lot, Schuppanzigh and Gyrowetz too. Today in the Antiken study [1] a German sees me; when I have spoken a word, Celiński is asked if it is Chopin? and with great leaps comes to me, he is glad that he has the pleasure of getting to know such a Künstler [2] , saying: “Sie haben mich vorgestern wahrhaft entzückt und begeistert. [3] It was the same man who, sitting next to Maciejowski, was terribly happy with Chmiel. I won't give a third concert and I wouldn't play a second one even if they didn't necessarily want to, and then it occurred to me that in Warsaw they could say: ""Well, he gave one concert and left, maybe it turned out badly."" They promise me a good review. I was at the journalist's today; I liked him, luckily. I do not write how much Würfel is good for me, because it is impossible to describe it. And the second time I play for free, and it's to please the count, who is thin in his pocket (but it's secret). I'm supposed to play Rondo and improvise. Besides, I am healthy and cheerful, I eat and drink well. I like Vienna and there are enough Poles in it; there is even one in the ballet who cared about me so much during my performance that he himself brought me water with sugar, added hearts, etc. - Please tell Mr. Elsner all this and apologize to him for not writing, but I am so torn that I I know where my hours go. Mr. Skarbek, who mainly persuaded me to give a concert, thank you, because this is already an introduction to the world. [1] Antiken-gabinet (from German) – a study of antiquities. [2] Künstler (German) – artist. [3] Sie haben... begeistert (German) - the other day you truly delighted me and carried me away."
"If I was well received the first time, yesterday was even better. Applause resumed three times when I appeared on the stage; the audience grew larger. Baron..., I don't know his name anymore, a theatrical financier, thanked me for the recipe [1], saying: ""if so many gathered, it was certainly not for the ballet, which everyone knows well"". With my Rondo I amused everyone from the profession of musicians. From Kapellmeister Lachner to the piano tuner, they marvel at the beauty of the composition. I know that ladies and artists have liked me. Gyrowetz, standing close to Celiński, shouted and applauded. Only the petrified Germans do not know whether I pleased them. Yesterday one of them came back from the theater, and I was already at supper; so others ask him, how was he having fun? ""Beautiful ballet,"" he replied. ""But the academy?"" Evidently he recognized me, though my back was turned to him, for he began to talk about something else. I felt obliged not to hinder his outpouring of feelings, and I went to bed saying to myself: He has not yet been born, Which would please everyone! I played twice, the second time I was even better received; it goes to a crescendo [2] , which is how I like it. Because I'm leaving at 9 o'clock tonight, so I have to return visits in the morning. Yesterday, Schuppanzigh mentioned that as I was leaving Vienna so soon, I should return soon. I replied that I would come to study; to which the baron interjected: ""in that case I have no reason to come"" - which was confirmed by other voices. They are compliments, but comforting. Nobody wants to take me for a student here. Blahetka said that he was surprised at nothing as much as that I learned it in Warsaw. I replied that with Mr Żywy and Elsner, the biggest ass would learn. I'm sorry I can't prove myself with any diary yet; I know that the review in the editorial office of this magazine, which I have subscribed to and which Mr. Bäuerle, the editor, will send back to Warsaw, is written. I don't know, maybe they were waiting for a second appearance. It comes out twice a week: on Tuesday and Saturday; perhaps you will read something favorable or unfavorable from me before me. I captured the learned and the sensitive. It'll be something to talk about. – I wanted to write something else, but yesterday is so stuck in my head that I can't put my thoughts together ... My finances are doing well so far. I was just now at Schuppanzigh and Czerny's with a farewell. Black more sensitive than all his compositions. – I have already packed my pacifier, I just have to go to Haslinger's, and from there to the cafe opposite the theater, where I will find Gyrowetz, Lachner, Kreutzer, Seyfried, etc.. In two nights and one day we will be in Prague; at 9 o'clock in the evening we sit down in the eilwagen, it will be a lovely journey, lovely company. [1] Receta (from French recette) - influence, income. [2] Crescendo (Italian) – gradually, increasing."
"After tender farewells in Vienna, tender ones indeed, because Miss Blahetka gave me her compositions with her handwritten signature as a keepsake, and her father told me to hug Papa and Mama and congratulate such a son. Young Stein cried, Schuppanzigh, Gyrowetz, in a word, all the artists said goodbye most tenderly. – So after such stories and the promise that I will return, I get into the eilwagen. We were escorted by Nidecki and two more Poles, leaving half an hour later for Trieste. They spent a few days in Vienna and saw us often. One of them is called Niegolewski from Greater Poland, a young boy going to the waters with his tutor, or rather travel companion, Kopytowski, a Warsaw dormitory. Mrs. Hussarzewska, with whom I was saying goodbye (both kind and dignified), wanted to keep me for dinner, but I had no time, I had to fly to Haslinger's. – This one, too, after tender wishes to return and making a serious promise that my Variations will come out in five weeks, in order to throw them around the world in the fall, recommends to Papa and bows, although there is no pleasure to know. We get into the eilwagen; some young German with us. Since we were supposed to sit next to each other for two nights and a day, we make acquaintance. He is a merchant from Gdańsk, who knows the Pruszaks, Sierakowski from Waplewo, Jawurek, Ernemann, Gressers, etc. Two years ago he was in Warsaw, his name is Normann. We had an excellent traveling companion; just returned from Paris. We stop at the same hotel and decided together, having visited Prague, to go to Teplitz and Dresden. It would be childish not to take advantage of the opportunity to see Dresden, especially since finances allow, and in four comfortable and cheap travel. After great nudges and knocks in the eilwagen - yesterday at 12 noon we stopped in Prague, so we went straight to the table d'hôte [1] . After lunch we went to Hanka's, to whom Mr. Hube gave Maciejowski a letter of recommendation. I regretted that I had not thought of writing to Mr. Skarbek asking for a letter of introduction to this eminent scholar. Having enjoyed ourselves in the cathedral church in the castle, we did not find Hanka at home. In general, the city is beautiful, as you can see from the castle hill; big, old and once prosperous. I got six letters from Vienna just before I left, five from Würfel, one from Blahetka to Pixis to show me the conservatory. They also wanted me to perform here, but I will only stay three days; besides, I have no desire to spoil what I won in Vienna (because Paganini was forced out here as well), so I'll let it go. These five letters from Würfel are to the director and kapellmeister of the theater, to the first local musical figures. I will give them back, because he asked me earnestly, but I do not intend to play. The kind Würfel also gave me a letter to Klengel in Dresden. I'm finishing writing, because it's time to go to Hanka; I will recommend myself to him as Skarbek's godson, I hope there will be no need for a letter. [1] Table d'hôte - a common table, a common meal in a guesthouse, hotel at a fixed time."
"To the Honorable Mr. and Mrs. Chopin, professors in Warsaw, and to my Beloved Parenthood for this time from my son playing in Dresden. I am well and happy. Today, a week like in Vienna, I didn't know yet that I would be in Dresden. By lightning, but not without benefits, we visited Prague. Hanka was glad that I gave him information about Mr. Skarbek. We had to enter his book, dedicated to visitors to the Praga Museum, and to those who have special consideration for him. There is already Brodziński, Morawski, etc. So each of us started with a concept; one in verse, the other in prose. Szwejkowski wrote a peror. What should a musician do? Fortunately, Maciejowski came up with the idea of making four stanzas of the mazurka; I added some music and signed up with my poet in the most original way possible. Hanka was happy, because it was Mazur addressed to him, to his merits in the field of the Slavs. He gave me complete views of Praga for Mr. Skarbek. I will not write about where he led us, after what beautiful views; I have no space to describe the magnificent cathedral church with the silver St. John of Nepomuk, the beautiful Wenceslas chapel, inlaid with amethysts and other precious stones... I will tell you when I come. – Letters to Pixis from Blahetka and Würfel won me the most polite reception. Pixis dropped out of school, kept me at his place, and asked me many questions. Glancing at the desk, I see Klengel's visiting card; I ask, is the namesake of this famous Dresden man in Prague? He replied that Klengel himself had just arrived and, not finding him at home, had left a ticket. I was glad, because I had a letter for him from Vienna, which if I mentioned it to Pixis, he would ask me to visit him after dinner, because that was the time Klengel had set for him to go. Somehow we got together on the Pixis stairs. “I heard him play his Fugues for two hours. I didn't play because I wasn't asked. It plays nice, but I would like a better one (quietly). – Klengel gave me a letter: All Ornatissimo Signor, Cavaliere Morlacchi, primo maestro della Capella Re[g]ale [1] , in which he told me that he asked him to show me all the musical Wesen [2] in Dresden and take me to Miss Pechwell, his pupil, the first, in his opinion, pianist there. He was very affectionate; I stayed with him for two hours before leaving. He's going to Vienna and Italy, we had a lot to talk about. – A lovely acquaintance, I value her more than Czerny, the poor fellow (hush!). We enjoyed everything in Prague for three days. Anim watched as time flew by. I always have something to do, and that's why on the eve of my departure I leave the study, unbuttoned I run into another lodgings, and only in the middle of it some cheerful traveler tells me with surprise: ""Guten Morgen! ” – “ Bitte um Verzeihung! ”[3] – and scratched my legs. The positions were very similar to each other. Leaving Prague on the Separatwagen at 12 noon, we arrived in Teplitz in the evening. The next day, in Badeliste [4], I found the name of Ludwik Łempicki, I went straight away to say good morning to him; he was happy and said that there were many Poles here, including old Pruszak, Kochler Józef and Kretkowski from Kamionna. They eat together im deutschen Saale, but that he will not be at dinner today, because he is invited to the Castle, to the Duchy of Clary. It is a considerable, almost independent family, with huge estates and the town of Teplitz itself. Duchess Clary is the sister of Choteck, the Czech governor. Lempicki asked me to do him a favor and go with him to the duchy for the evening, that he was at home there and that he would mention it at dinner. Since we spent the day exploring the area, I agreed. We went everywhere, we also went to Dux, the Wallenstein palace, there is a piece of the skull of this great chief, the hallebard with which he was killed, and many other memorabilia. In the evening, instead of going to the theatre, I got dressed, saw the white gloves from the last performance in Vienna, and at half past nine I went to the duchy with Lempicki. We enter: kleine aber honette Compagnie [5] . An Austrian prince, a general whose name I have forgotten, an English ship's captain, several young gents, apparently also Austrian princes, and one Saxon general, named Leiser, terribly orderly and with a line on his face. -After tea, before which I talked a lot with X. Clary himself, his mother asked me to ""congratulate"" to sit down to the piano (good piano, Graffa). ""I deigned"", but on my part I also asked them to ""deign"" to give me a subject for improvisation. Immediately, then, between the female sex, seated around a large table, and the embroidering, knitting [6] , knitting, there was a crash: un th?me . The three fair princesses colluded, until one appealed to Mr. Fritsche (I thought young Clary's tutor), who, by common consent, gave me a theme from Rossini's Moses. I improvised - and somehow I was so lucky that General Leser talked to me for a long time afterwards, and having learned that I was going to Dresden, he immediately wrote the following letter to Baron von Friesen: "" Monsieur Frédéric Chopin est recommandé de la part du Géneral Leiser ? Monsieur le Baron de Friesen, Maître de Cérémonie de SM le Roi de Saxe, pour lui ?tre utile pendant son séjour ? Dresde, et de lui procurer la connaissance de plusieurs de nos premiers artistes'. Underneath in German: 'Herr Chopin ist selbst einer der vorzüglichsten Pianospieler, die ich bis jetzt kenne. [7] A word-for-word extract from General Leiser's ticket, written in pencil and unsealed. “I played four times that evening, and the princesses wanted me to stay in Teplitz and have dinner with them the next day. Lempicki even undertook to take me with him to Warsaw, if only I could stay longer. But not wanting to leave my colleagues, I declined with great thanks. Yesterday, therefore, at 5 o'clock in the morning, in a wagon hired for two thalers, we left Teplitz and arrived at Dresden at 4 o'clock in the afternoon. I immediately met Lewiński and Łabędzki. I am very much about to travel; today Goethe's Faust, and on Saturday, as Klengel told me, an Italian opera. Letter started last night, finished this morning. I'm getting dressed, going to Baron Friese and Morlacchi, because I have no time to waste. In a week's time we are thinking of setting out from here, but first we shall visit Saxon Switzerland, if the weather permits. Having spent a few days in Wrocław, only then did he go home. I am in such a hurry to visit you, my beloved Parents, that I would not want to join Mr. and Mrs. Wiesiołowski. I'm just going to tell stories, fights, but nice, nice. P.S. ""Maître de Cérémonie"", Baron de Friesen, received me politely, asked where I was standing; he announced that the chamberlain in charge of the band was not in Dresden at the moment, but that he would find out who was replacing him; and that, however short my stay in this city, he would make every effort to be of some use to me. Full of bowing ceremonies. I'm saving the rest for a letter, which in a week or a half from Wrocław, I wrote a picture gallery, an exhibition of produce, more important gardens, I gave visits, and now I'm going to the theatre; I hope that's enough for one day! PS second. My letter arrived late at night; I'm back from Faust. From half past five we had to stand in front of the theater; The show ran from 6am to 11am. Devrient, whom I had already seen in Berlin, played Faust. Goethe's eightieth anniversary was celebrated here today. Terrible but great fantasy. During intermissions, excerpts from Spohr's opera of the same name were played... I'm going to bed... Tomorrow morning I'll be waiting for Morlacchi, with him I'll go to Miss Pechwell. Not I to him, but he comes to me. Ha, ha, ha... Good night! Your Frederick. [1] All Ornatissimo... Re[g]ale (Italian) – to His Excellency Chevalier Morlacchi, director of the Royal Orchestra. [2] Wesen (German) – essence, content; here: the world. [3] Guten Morgen! – Bitte um Verzeihung! (German) - Good morning! - Sorry! [4] Badeliste (German) - list of patients. [5] Kleine aber honette Compagnie (German and French) – a small but well-matched company. [6] Stryk (from German) – to knit. [7] Monsieur Frédéric Chopin... bis jetzt kenne (French and German) – General Leiser recommends Mr. Fryderyk Chopin to Mr. Baron de Friesen, Master of Ceremonies of His Majesty the King of Saxony, asking him to help him during his stay in Dresden and introduce him to our most outstanding artists... Mr. Chopin is one of the most excellent pianists I have ever known."
"Dearest Titus. You wouldn't have heard from me yet if it wasn't for Winc. Skarżyński. – I met him and he mentioned that you won't be in Warsaw until the end of this month; while Kostuś in Dresden told me that you were to be at Sister's on the 15th. I thought you would hear about my great voyage by word of mouth, which would have pleased me more, because I would honestly prefer to talk to you - but when so, know, dear, that I have been to Krakow, Vienna, Prague, Dresden, Wroclaw. We spent the first week in Krakow on walks and sightseeing around Krakow. Ojców is really nice, but I won't write much about it, because although you haven't been there, you know from the very faithful Tańska's description where everything is and how it is. In a merry company, though a little strange, I went to Vienna, and if Krakow took me so much that I could devote little time to thinking about home and you, Vienna so maddened me, infatuated me, bewitched me that two weeks passed sitting without a letter from any home I felt no longing. Imagine, in such a short time they made me play Imperial-King twice in public. theater. Things happened that way. Haslinger, my editor, mentioned to me that it would be better for my compositions if I performed in Vienna; that my name is unknown, and my compositions are difficult and inconspicuous - but I, not thinking of performing now, anyway, having not played for a few weeks, refused him, saying that I am not able to show off in front of such an excellent audience - yes on this stopped. ""Meanwhile, Mr. Gallenberg, who writes these beautiful ballets, who is the head of the Theater in Vienna, and Haslinger presented me as a coward afraid to perform. Mr. he was so polite that he donated the theater - and I was so sure of myself that I thanked him. The next day something knocks on the room; I look, Würfel enters, conjures and says that I would disgrace my parents, Elsner, and even myself if, given the time, I did not make myself heard in Vienna. They drugged me so much that I agreed to the concert, and Würfel did everything at that moment, and the next day there were posters. It's hard to go back, and I still don't know what to play and how to play. “Three instrumentmakers gave me a pantalion for my lodgings. I thanked him, because my room was too small, and those few hours of playing wouldn't have helped me much, especially since I was due to perform in two days. So in one day I took acquaintance with Meyseder, with Gyrowetz, with Lakner, with Kreutz, Schupanzig, with Merk, with Levi, in a word, with all the great musicians of Vienna. – Despite this, the orchestra left me sour during the rehearsal. – The most important thing is that I have only just arrived and I am playing my own compositions all of a sudden. – So I started the rehearsal with Variations for You, which were to be preceded by Rondo krakowskie. – They went well, but I started Rondo a couple of times, and the orchestra was terribly mixed up and reprimanded for bad handwriting. All this confusion was caused by pauses, written differently at the bottom and differently at the top, although it was announced that only the upper numbers meant. It was partly my fault, but I hoped they would understand me; meanwhile they were angry with this inaccuracy, and there are only gentlemen virtuosos and composers, enough that they tuned me so much that I was already on the alert for the evening to get sick. But Baron Demmar, the theatrical regisseur, realizing that it was a little reluctance of the orchestra, especially since Würfel wanted to conduct and they don't like him, I don't know why, so he asked me to improvise instead of Rondo. – As he said it, the orchestra made big eyes. ""I was so annoyed by it that out of desperation I agreed to it, and who knows if my unhappy mood and risk did not spur me to perform better this evening."" Somehow I was not alarmed by the sight of the Viennese audience, and since it is not customary there for the orchestra to perform on stage, it only remains in its places - pale, with a distinguished companion for turning pages (who boasted to me that Moscheles, Hummel, Herz, was in Vienna, etc., etc., turned the pages), I sat down to a strange, perhaps the best Viennese restaurant at the time. Graff robotic instrument. “Believe me, I played out of desperation. Variations of the effect did so much that, apart from the fact that after each variation of applause, after finishing, I had to show up on stage again. Intermezzo was sung by Miss Weltheim, the court singer of the Saxon king. – Finally, it's time to improvise; I don't know, but somehow it happened that the orchestra started clapping, and I was called again after leaving. - This is how the first concert ended. The Viennese newspapers praised me lavishly, because I don't do anything with the ""Kurier"". I played a second time in a week, because they wanted, which I was happy about, because they won't say that he played once and ran away. Especially since the second one I insisted on playing was Rondo Krakowiak, over which Gyrowetz, Lakner and other local masters, even the orchestra (forgive me, so to speak) were soaring and I was summoned not once, but twice. – I had to play the Variations again at the second concert, because the ladies and Haslinger liked them terribly. They will come out in the Odeon, I hope enough honor. Lichnowski, Beethoven's protector, wanted to give me his piano for a concert; and that's a lot - because he thought mine was too weak - but it's my way of playing, which again the ladies liked very much, especially Miss Blachetka, the first Viennese piano player, who must have been fine with me (by the way, 20 years ago not with my parents, who liked me very much and gave me letters to Prague, and even a clever, pretty girl) when she gave me her composition for a departure with her handwritten signature as a keepsake. A Viennese newspaper said about the second concert: ""He is a young man following his own path, on which he knows how to please, and which is far from all other concert forms"", etc. I expect that enough; especially since he ends: ""Mr. Chopin was also widely liked today."" – Forgive me that I am forced to write you such sentences about myself, but I am writing it to you, and they give me more pleasure than I don't know what couriers. – I met Czerny on my brother – I often played two pianos with him at his place. A good man, but nothing more - of all piano acquaintances, I was most pleased with Klengel, whom I met in Prague at Pixis'. He played his fugues for me (you can say that this is a continuation of Bach's fugues, there are 48 of them and as many canons). - You can see the difference from Czerny. “Klengel gave me a letter to Morlacchi in Dresden. Morlacchi, the first kapellmeister of the Saxon king, received me very politely, visited me and took me to Miss Pechwel, Klengel's pupil, who is considered the first piano player there. – He plays well. – We were in Saxon Switzerland. Lots of beauties. Wonderful gallery. Only the Italian opera was taken from under my nose. The same day I left, which was Crociato in Egitto, I was consoled by the fact that I had seen him in Vienna. – Pruszakowa and Oleś, and Kostuś in Dresden, I met them on the trip; what a joy, Mr. Frycek, Mr. Frycek; I enjoyed it so much that if I had been alone I would have stopped. – Sam Pruszak in Toeplitz, where I also saw him. They went to him now. – Beautiful Toeplitz, I was there one day and then at the evening at X-na Klara's. I'm sorry to have to end, but I've already told you enough. I am awaiting your arrival - I will often pass Sto-Jurska to Brandt, I will look and write to you. I hug you heartily, ""in the mouth"" will you let me? – F.Ch. I met Max today. He told me that he was radically healthy and stood a l'hôtel garni [1] . In a green frock coat; he was kind enough to promise me his visit. He remembered you, he didn't tell you to bow because he didn't know that I was going to write - in the morning I didn't know it either. ""If you think, put a few words on paper for me."" Healthy everyone that may interest you. ""Did you know Miss Filipina, Linde's cousin, who was Berger?"" - she died. – And on my way back, I was at the wedding of Miss Bronikowska Melasia; a beautiful child, she married Kurnatowski. You were often mentioned, she told you to bow. Her peer, cousin, who also got married a few days earlier, an even prettier child - they had a nice wedding day. I'm so tired that I don't want to get up. Give me a kiss. Mr. Karol, my hug. F.Ch. Papa, Mama send you their bows and wishes, the children do the same. [1] L'hôtel garni - furnished rooms."
"Dear Tytus, At that very moment I received a letter from you, when I was about to write again, thinking that either the first letter had not arrived or I had written something terribly stupid. I am glad that you, as far as I gather from the letter, are well, the better I will know from Charles. You write to me to explain more clearly what is going on with me and people I know about. Kostuś wrote to me in his last letter through his father, who had already returned from Toeplitz to St. Mateusz to the Łowicz fair, that he was thinking of staying in Dresden until Christmas, that they would have fun, because according to all resemblance to the truth, Mrs. Sokołowska and her daughter would spend the winter there will be; with the fact that Miss Wanda suffered from kidney fever so badly that there was a time when the doctors of hope did little; she was ill in Marienbad, convalescing in Dresden. ""I haven't written to Kostya yet... I don't need to explain to you why... you know my laziness; I barely made it to Würfel to scrawl a few words. – You write to me that you learned about my concerts from 2 newspapers. If the Polish ones, which, unfortunately, they could not only translate, but also deliberately distorted the Viennese sentences [1] for my disavantage, which you will learn better orally, you could not be satisfied. – “Sammler” from Viennese and “Zeitschrift fur Litteratur”, from which Hube (who, having visited Trieste, Venice, returned last week) brought me, where they disassemble my playing and composition in detail and very flatteringly (forgive me for writing this) where at the end they call me ""Selbstkräftiger Virtuos"", and also richly endowed by nature; such exceptions to suit you, I would have nothing to be ashamed of. – If you want to know what I am thinking of doing with my person this winter, find out that I will not stay in Warsaw, but where circumstances will take me, I do not know. – It is true that X. Radziwiłł, or rather she, very polite, invited me to Berlin, even giving me a flat in their own palace, but what do I care when I need it now where I started, especially since I promised to return to Vienna, and in one from the newspapers there it was written that a longer stay in Vienna would be beneficial for my appearance in the world (""Anschlag""). You probably feel the need for me to return to Vienna, not for Miss Blachetka, about whom I think I wrote, she is a young, pretty, playing person, because perhaps, unfortunately, I already have my ideal, to whom I faithfully, without speaking to him it's been half a year, I've been serving, who I dream about, in whose memory the adagio from my concert, which inspired me this waltz this morning, which I am sending you. Watch out one place + marked. Nobody knows about it but you. How sweet it would be for me to play it for you, dearest Titus. In the Trio, the bass singing should dominate until the upper e flat treble in the 5th bar, which you don't need to write about, because you feel it. - Nothing from music news, except that every Friday there is music at Kessler's. – Yesterday, among others, they played Otteto Spohra, wonderful, wonderful. It was evening at Sowan's, but not a good one. There I got to know Bianchi, who rides with the Chiavinias; he plays the violin well, but anyway, fanfaron, as far as I could tell. – Soliwa polite, he asked about you. – I met Oborski yesterday. He asked if I didn't know about you; he gave me information about himself, that he was in office, as he says, at the Bank. That is dans la correspondance [2] , that for two days he is going through huge files of letters from various foreign bankers. He looks good, Jelski gave him this place, and handsome as he was, he always stands ? l'hôtel garni, it is obvious who he will visit. I haven't seen the local Cinderella yet, today Trade for wives. The French Theater opens on Monday. Barański bows to you, he is now in Switzerland; Jędrzejewicz was about to go to Italy from Geneva; Woycicki came from London, he gives at the Lyceum. When you come next month, you will see our whole family painted, even Zywny, who often mentions you, made me a surprise [3], ordered him to paint himself and Miroszesio hit him so well that it is astonishing. – Before I got your letter, I was on Miodowa Street, I am in the habit of looking up at [C]hodkiewicz, but the shutters in the room were in the same position, somewhere, both yesterday and the day before. You must also know that Wincenty Skarżyński made me a false appetite, telling me for certain news that you would come soon. I go to Brzezina every day. You don't have anything new except for the Pixis Concert, which I don't keep much about. I think the roundabout is the best. You won't believe how sad Warsaw is for me now; If it wasn't for the fact that my family makes me feel better, I wouldn't have stayed. – And how sad it is not to go to someone in the morning, to share with him sadness, joy; how wicked it is when something is heavy and there is nowhere to put it. You know what the allusion is. I say to the piano what I would often say to you. Kostuś will be glad if I tell him that you wrote and that you will come, or at least that you promised. You should bring the idea of a ride to fruition. – I would be overjoyed if I could go with you; but I must go differently than you; I will go to study from Vienna to Italy, and next winter I am to be with Hub in Paris - although all this may still change, especially since Papa would be happy to send me to Berlin, which I do not wish. – Speaking of Berlin, old Pruszak is going to Gdańsk. Laczynski Paulin, whom I recently met, maintains that Pruszak will not survive the winter without his wife. Anyway, Mrs. Pruszak's fifth resolution was to stay in Dresden until Christmas. – If I was going to Vienna, maybe I would go upstairs to Dresden and Prague to see Klengel, the Prague conservatory, etc., and then how nice it would be for me to see Kostuś. Your lowers bow to you. I also met Geysmer the other day. I would be glad to see you again in Warsaw, because I may have a scratch in November too, but it would be towards the end of the month, and we would not say goodbye, because the last words were: ""so I will send you a pacifier."" – Just imagine, I lost my roller while driving from Miss Bronikowska's wedding! Enough of that, because I can bore you with idle news, and I would never want to do anything that would displease you. If you can, write me two words, and you will make me happy again for a few weeks. Forgive me for sending you a Waltz, which may and will anger you with me, but God willing, I wanted to please you with it, because I love you madly. F. Chopin. [1] Disvantage (French: desavantage) - disadvantage. [2] Dans la correspondance (French) – here: in the correspondence section. [3] Surpriza (fr. surprise) – a surprise."
"Dearest Titus! Perhaps you will think where I got such a mania for writing letters that I am sending you the third letter in such a short time. I am leaving today at 7 o'clock in the evening by stagecoach to the Wiesiołowskis in Poznań, and that is why I am writing in advance, especially since I do not know how long I will have to stay there, although I only took my passport for a month. My thought is to come back in two weeks. – The reason for my departure is also the presence of Radziwiłł in his estates outside Kalisz. For there was a proposal that I should go to Berlin, live there in his palace, and such words, beautiful, funny - but I see no advantage in it, even if it were to come true, which I doubt, because it is more than one grace of the Lord, which I saw on a bright horse, but Papa refuses to believe that it was only des belles paroles [1], and that is the reason for my departure, which I think I have already written to you once. In this respect you know how good I am that I am ready to repeat one thing ten times, and always for a novelty; – Mrs. Pruszak was yesterday, she mentioned that Mrs. Wanda is already healthy, that Kostus is bored in Dresden, which I do not want to believe. Last week, Soliwowa and her children went to Italy, to her husband's mother. I know this news from Ernemann, whom I saw at Kessler's quartets. You should know that Kessler gives little music every Friday. Everyone gathers there and plays – nothing is arranged in advance, only what comes along in the company is played. And so last Friday there was Ries Concerto in C sharp minor in a quartet, there was Hummel's Trio in E major, Beethoven's last Trio (I haven't heard anything similarly great for a long time, there Beethoven mocks the whole world) - Quatuor X-ia by Prussian Ferdinand alias Dussek and finally singing, but not singing, only a parody of singing, which was really strange. You must know that Cymmermann, who plays the flute, has a particularly funny voice which he utters with his lips and hand. It's like a kitten, like a calf, something like that. Nowakowski also has an original voice, resembling a small, false, childish trumpet, which he brings out with the help of some flat mouth compression. Filip took advantage of this and wrote a duet for Cymrnermann and Nowakowski, with a choir; it is a great folly, though well done, but so ridiculous that it was impossible to finish. – Although it was after Beethoven's Trio, it did not manage to erase the great impression it made on me, especially since it was well enforced. Serwaczyński was the accompanist, and he is a very nice accompanist. He's going to give a concert this week. In my opinion, these are unnecessary things, but they excite him that he wants to stay here (which would be nice), he wants lessons, and he thinks it's the best way to get hours. – When I return and you are already in Warsaw, we will do a trio a couple of times, which he has already promised me, because Biela[w]ski has to beg terribly, and there is little difference. - In other words, it's a nice accompaniment. – Elsner praised the concert adagio, he said it was new, but as for Ronda, I don't want anyone's verdict yet, because I'm not completely satisfied with it yet. I wonder if I'll be finished when I get back or not. ""They told me yesterday that a Miss Petersburg came here, what's her name, I forgot, she's supposed to be very young and plays the violin astonishingly."" – Next Sunday they are to give the resumed Luciper's Palace, Kurpiński's old opera. – I meet Oborski, Obniski MA with an excellent degree, Masło[w]ski ditto . – Barciński wrote from Geneva, he tells you to bow, he and Jędrzejewicz parted ways in Schafhaus – Barciński went back to France, and the other to Münnich. – Thank you very much for the note written by my brother, I was glad with it – you already have the consolation that when you want, you can cheer people up and make people happy, you won't believe how angry he was in the morning, and how good after dinner when he received the letter; That's enough for today, I'm done, because I still have some things to do before I leave. - I hug you cordially, that's what they usually write at the end of letters, but they don't know what they're writing - believe me, however, that I know what I wrote, because I love you like F. Ch. I did Exercice large en forme [2] , in my one way, as we shall see, I will show it to you. [1] Des belles paroles (French) - beautiful words. [2] En forme (French) – as to the form."
My dear Chopin, I accept with great gratitude the dedication of the Trio of your compositions, which you kindly wish to dedicate to me. Please, please, even speed up its printing, so that I would have the pleasure of making it with you during your stay in Poznań, on the way to Berlin. Please accept, dear Mr. Chopin, reassurances of the sincere interest which your talent has aroused in me, as well as of my high esteem for him. Anthony Fr. Radziwill.
"Dearest Tytus, I received your last letter, in which you tell me to kiss you, in Antonin at Radziwiłł's. I was there for a week, you won't believe how good I was with him. I got back in the last post, and that's barely excused from a long stay. As for my person and the momentary amusement, I would have sat there until I had been expelled, but my business, and especially my Concerto, not yet finished and impatiently awaiting its finale, impelled me to leave this paradise. There were two Eves, young princesses, extremely kind and kind, musical, tender beings. The old Duchess herself knows that it is not birth that makes a man, and so binds her by her conduct that it is impossible not to like her. He, you know how he likes music. He showed me his Faust, and I found many things so well thought out, even brilliant, that I could never expect it from the viceroy. – Among other things, there is one scene in which Mephistopheles tempts Gröthen [!] by playing the guitar and singing under her window and at the same time you can hear choral singing from a nearby church; this contrast makes a great effect in execution; on paper you can see artificially complex singing, and more devilish accompaniment under a very serious chorale. From this you can get an idea of his way of seeing music; and a glutton was killed. Theatrical music matters to him as much as it paints positions and feelings – that's why even the overture does not have a finale, it only enters into the introduction, and the orchestra will still be behind the stage, so that the strings move, strenght and blowing are not visible. – I wrote to him alla polcca with cello: Nothing but trinkets, for the salon, for the ladies; I wanted, you see, that X-girl Wanda would learn. ""It's like I've been giving her lessons all this time."" Young, 17 years old - nice and dalipan, it was nice to set fingers. But joking aside, there's a lot of true musical feeling, so there's no need to talk: crescendo here, piano here, faster here, slower here, and so on. – I could not excuse myself from sending them my F-minor Polonaise, which occupied Eliza's X, so please send it to me first, because I don't want to be considered rude, and I don't want to write from memory, lover, otherwise I might write than it actually is. – You can imagine the character of X, when I had to play this Polonaise for her every day, and she liked nothing so much as the Trio in A flat major. Yes, they are all good there. – On my way back, I was in Kalisz for one evening, where Ms. Łączyńska and Miss Biernacka were there. She made me dance, I had to dance a mazurka, and that with a lady even prettier than her, or at least as beautiful, Miss Nieszkowska Paulina, who does not want general Miecielski, and he is necessarily addressing her. – Miss Biernacka talked a lot with me about you and your brother and you could see the sweet feeling she felt during that winter spent in Warsaw. I talked to her all evening, or rather had to answer and ask; never seemed so good to me as then, especially speaking of the sweetness of Mr. Karol's character. I am not joking. I told her that you would know about the whole evening, that I would complain to you that she had tempted me to dance, but she was not afraid of you. – I met her father, Sulisławice is close to Antonin. – Among other things, Jaxa Marcinkowski's worthy dance, which on that evening with muddy shoes, he was swinging till he dropped. I was in Kalisz only one day. Kostus wrote to me, but I have not written back to him yet. – X-żna Radziwiłłowa wishes me to be in Berlin in May, so nothing prevents me from going to Vienna for the winter. As much as I think, I will not leave before December. - on Papa's 6th name day, so I would probably leave by the end of December, so I hope to see you, and I'm not doing any projects - if I had gone before your arrival, which, in all probability, cannot be, I would write to you, because nothing I want nothing more than to see you, and even abroad. You won't believe how I don't get anything in Warsaw now, I have no one to say two words to, no one to look at with confidence. – You wanted my portrait – if I could steal one from X-husband Eliza, I would send it to you; she did me twice in the album, and as much as people told me, very similar. – Miroszewski has no time now; my life, you are too good - and then believe me that I am almost always by your side, I do not leave you and it will be so until death, your most affectionate F. Ch. I remind you once again of the Polonaise in F minor, send it to me, my life, by first post. I wrote a couple of exercisses - with you I would play them well. Papa, Mom, children, Zywny bow to you - Jędrzejewicz wrote from Vienna, he is coming back. Lucyper Kurpiński Palace gave, but fails. Last Saturday Kessler played Hummel's Concerto in E major at Resursa. Serwaczyński also played. – Maybe I will play next Saturday, I would play your Variations. – Mrs. Bourgeois-Schiroli, a beautiful alto, sang with Soliwa twice at music evenings, Teichmann told me. Miss Wołków after her mother in mourning, and Miss Gładkowska blindfolded. Żyliński even sang with Mrs. Schiroli, but they say that he seemed like a rat next to her. ""That's all the news I know."" - I haven't seen Max for a long time, but I'm sure he's well. – Gaszyński wrote a comedy in verse for the Rozmaitości theater where now the whole world is collapsing. Its title is The Doctor's Anteroom. Goodbye geese, Rinaldi, whenever he meets me, he asks for you. For next Sunday there is supposed to be a Millionaire (Bauer als Milionair), Drechseler's little comic opera. I don't know why they're going to give us this German nonsense, except for decorations and metamorphoses of various funny, amusing children. They will fly. – Sachetti was supposed to paint the decorations. ""It's all I've got in my pen."" I don't want to write news, I just want to caress you. ""Let me hug you one more time."" F.Ch."
"My dearest life! I have never missed you as much as I do now; I have no one to pour out to, I don't have you. – Your one look after each concert would be more to me than all the praises of the paperboys, the Elsners, the Kurpińskis, the Soliwas, etc. Immediately after receiving the letter from you, I wanted to describe the first concert to you, but I was so distracted and busy preparing for the second one, which I gave on Monday, that having sat down I could not collect my thoughts. And today I am still like that, but I will not wait for a moment of peace of mind, a moment so rare for me, because the post office will be gone. So the first concert, although it was full and there were no boxes or chairs for three days ahead, did not make an impression on the mass, as I understood it. – The first Allegro accessible to a small number was applauded, but I think because you had to wonder what it was! – and pretend to be connoisseurs! - Adagio and Rondo made the greatest effect, here more sincere shouts could be heard - but what Potpury about the Polish theme completely, in my opinion, did not reach the goal. Applause was given and in the conviction that we should let him know that we were not bored. – Kurpiński considered new beauties in my concert that evening, and Wiman even admitted that he did not know what people saw in my Allegro. – Ernemann was completely content, and Elsner regretted that my pantalion was deaf and that the bass passages could not be heard. That evening, while the paradis and those who stood in the orchestra were satisfied, the parterre complained about the soft playing - and I would like to be at Cinderella's to hear the debates that must have been going on about me. That is why Mochnacki in ""Kuryer Polski"" praised me to the skies, and especially Adagio, and at the end advises more energy. – I figured out where this energy was sitting, and at the second concert, not on my own, but on the Viennese one, I played the instrument. Diakov, the Russian general, was so kind that he gave me his instrument - better than Hummel's - and only then the audience was even more satisfied than at the first one. – Only applause, praise, that every note was struck like a pearl and that I played better on the second one than on the first one, and then, after being called, screaming for a third concert. Krakowskie Rondo had a huge effect, the applause was renewed 4 times. Kurpiński regretted that I did not play at the Viennese Fantasia, which Grzymała demanded even in ""Kuryer Polski"" the following day. – Elsner said that after the 2nd concert they can judge about me, although I can honestly say that I'd rather play on my own. The voice is, however, universal that the instrument was better applied to the place. – The schedule of the first concert was known to you – the second concert began with Nowakowski's symphony (par complaisance [1]), followed by the first Allegro from the Concerto. Bielawski played Beriot Variations; followed by Adagio and Rondo. – I started the second part with the Krakow roundabout; after which Majerowa managed to sing Soliwa's aria from Helena and Malwina better than ever. At last I improvised, which the first-story boxes liked very much. – If I have to tell you honestly, I improvised not the way I wanted, because it was not for this world. Nevertheless, I am surprised that Adagio made such a widespread effect; wherever I turn, only Adagios remind me. – Surely you have all the newspapers, or at least the main ones, from there you can judge that they were satisfied. – Moriolówna sent me a laurel wreath, today I got someone's poems. – Orłowski made mazurkas and waltzes from the themes of my Concerto, Sennewald, Brzezina's companion, asked me for my portrait, but I couldn't let him, because it would be too much at once, and I don't want butter wrapped around me, as that's what happened with Lelewel's portrait. I will send it to you as soon as I can, you want it, so you will have it, but no one but you will have my portrait. Only one person could still have it, and never before You, because You are the most dear to me. No one read your letter but me. As always, I carry your letters with me now. How blessed it will be for me - having left the city walls in May, thinking about my upcoming journey - to take out your letter and sincerely assure you that you love me, or at least look at the hand and handwriting of the one whom I can only love! – Next week they wanted me to play one more concert; but I do not want. – You won't believe what agony three days before the performance. Anyway, before Christmas I will finish the 1st Allegro of the 2nd Concerto, so I will wait with the 3rd concert until after wednesdays; although I know that even now I could have even more listeners, because the whole great world heard me little. – Among the parterre voices at the last concert about the 3rd calling for the third one, I heard one “in the City Hall” so loud that I heard it on stage, but I doubt that I would listen to it, because if I do, it will be in the theatre. I don't care about profit, because the theater did not bring me much, because the cashier did what he wanted, because everything seemed to him good. The two concerts, minus the costs, did not cost 5,000, although Dmuszewski recalled that the piano concert was not as numerous as the first, much less the second. – But what I mean is that in the Town Hall I would not play with less embarrassment, not much more effect, but not for everyone, because either for the highest class or for the city. ""If ever, I feel now that he hasn't been born yet, which would please everyone."" Dobriński is angry with me that I did not take his symphony, Mrs. Wodzyńska was angry that I did not keep her box, etc. – Speaking of Wodzyńska, whom I saw the other day at Mr. Pruszak's (Maryanna) name day, I remembered that I was also there for Brother He saw yours, who always has his good moments, and told you to bow. It was also shortly before the name day, I think for Saint Joseph, the celebration of the 25-year experience of the bride and groom, alias the silver wedding. Dinner very, naturally, not without milks and other hearty delicacies, God bless, not for me. “Yesterday I had dinner at Moriol's and later at Diakov's, where I also saw Soliwa. – He bows to you and promised to give me some card for you someday. – We played Hummel's La Rubinelle with the Kaczyńskis and quite good music was made. I do not want to tear myself away from the paper, especially since it seems to me that I have not yet written what I would like to interest you. I hid everything for dessert, and meanwhile I have no dessert other than sincere hugs, because I only have you. F. Chopin. Papa, Mama, the children bow to you beautifully. Alive. – I see Max away and he was at the theater at Mrs. Potocka's, and at the musical evening at Mrs. Nakwaska's. – I also recently met Łączyński in a cab. \r\n [1] Par complaisance (French) - out of courtesy."
"My dearest Life! Just last week I wanted to write to you, but it got so bad that I don't know where it went. – You must know that our world became musical in a terrible way, even Holy Week was not spared and that Monday was a big evening at Filipeus, where Mrs. had to be accompanied again. I will not write you any other details, except that Mrs. Gładkowska asked about you. The project is ready for the upcoming evening at the Lewicki's, where, among others, Father Galitzin will play Rode's Quartet, Hummel's La Sentinella will be made, and finally my Polonaise with violoncella, to which I added Adagio, an introduction deliberately for Kaczyński. We tried and it will pass. - These are salon news, musical news, now I'm moving on to newspaper and music news, which I care no less than salon news, the more so that I have rather favorable sentences; I'd like to send them to you. In one half-sheet article of ""Gazeta Warszawska"" Elsner must have had enough of the clipping when Soliwa told me at Moriol's dinner that if he hadn't had elewki at his speech, he was afraid of looking for a provocation, he would have written back himself. Anyway, he told me that you wrote to him, so I expect that if he writes back to you, this circumstance will not pass. – It is difficult to give you an idea of all this briefly; If I could, I would send you newspapers so that you would understand the matter properly. But since a word is enough for a wise head, so I will briefly mention to you what is going on here. – After my concerts, there were a lot of reviews, especially in ""Kuryer Polski"" - although they exaggerated praise, they were still bearable. – “Dziennik Urzędowy” also devoted a few pages to my panegyrics, but among other things, in one of its numbers, despite the best intentions, it scolded such nonsense that I was in despair from the moment I read the answer in “Gazeta Polska”, which most justly subtracted from me that what was the use of that exageration. You need to know that in this article of the ""Official Journal"" he claims that like Mozart the Germans will be proud of me, the Poles will be proud of me, a very clear nonsense. – But above, the same article states that if I was in some pedant or Rossinist (which is a stupid expression) got my hands, I would not be what (supposedly) I am. Although I am nothing, but he is right that if I had not learned from Elsner, who was able to convince me, I would certainly know even less than today. – This clip of the Rossinists and praising Elsner, who had already (supposedly) put up a student, outraged, you already know who, so much so that in ""Gazeta Warszawska"", supposedly starting with Fredro's Friends and ending with Count Ory, in the middle it beats that why should I be grateful to Elsner, when he will not throw students out of his sleeve, and he showed me (you must know that Nowakowski's Symphony was played at my second concert) that ""the devil will not whip the sand"". Thirty-five years ago, Elsner wrote the Quartet, whose title is ""dans le meilleur go?t polonais""[1], an addition made by the editor at the time because of the Polish minuet; so today's review laughs at this Quartet without, however, mentioning the author. Soliwa says that he would have laughed at Cecilia with the same words, especially since in this article, always lovingly and speaking of me as delicately as possible, he gives me a few noses and advises me to look at Rossini, but not copy it. This advice is given to me as a result of that article, which said that I was original, which ""Gazeta Warszawska"" does not want to deny. – I am invited to the holy day after tomorrow to Minasowicz, Kurpiński will be there too; I wonder what he'll say to me because you won't believe how warmly he always greets me. I saw him at Leszkiewicz's concert, on Wednesday a week passed. Little Leszkiewicz plays very well, but mostly from the elbow. However, as it seems to me, a better player will be like Krogulski. A sentence with which I have not yet dared to speak, although I have been pulled by the tongue several times. But enough of this music, now I am beginning my letter not to Mr. Music Lover, but to Tytus Woyciechowski, a citizen. Yesterday was Good Friday, all Warsaw went to their graves; and I, with Kostuś, who had returned from Sanniki the day before, traveled from one end of Warsaw to the other. ""The cat is bowing to you, and by the way, I'm telling you the following."" It was in the morning after the lesson when, having sat down to breakfast with Miss Aleksandra, a conversation begins that Mrs. Sowińska was told about the wedding of Miss Aleksandryna and Mr. Mleczko. I say that I have not heard; to which I was answered that since they know that I am always kind to this house, so I should know that: Mr. Mleczko proposed after great arguments. – Mrs. Pruszak says she never had such a terrible moment as when he fell at her feet crying et caetera. Curious about the result of the proposal, I am waiting to see if they will tell me anything about the declaration, and they have just said that although there is time for Mr. M., but it is not time for Miss A., so we have to wait a year, that is, until Miss A.'s future birthday, which can then accept or reject the decision itself. However, Mr. M. visited the graves with them yesterday. ""Your lows are bowing down."" Geysmer bows to you. I met Łączyński the other day, he was terribly haggard... and I saw brother Karol, how beautiful the donut looks. Ah, bryftreger! and a letter... from you. Oh, dearest, some kind of you! - Because I think about you, it's not strange! - As far as I can see from your letter, you only read ""Kuryer Warszawski"", if you can, read ""Kuryer Polskich"" and the 91st issue of ""Gazeta Warszawska"". Your advice about the evenings is right, and that's why I refused a few of them, as if I had a premonition of you, because you won't believe how you stand in my mind with almost every deed. I don't know if it's because I've learned to feel around you, but when I write something, I'd like to know if you like it, and it seems to me that my second Concerto in E minor won't have any value in my opinion until you won't hear it. Today Bromirski asked me for Thursday, and I assure you that you see him leaving with a receipt. - As for Gąsi, I met him the other day, it was about you; walks sadly, complains about unfavorable circumstances for the arts; when I see him, which I hope will happen to-day, I will tell him that you wrote to me. ""I don't have any nonsense to send, because it's not even worth it."" As for the 3rd concert, which they expect even more now, I won't give it until shortly before I leave and play a new one; the new one, not finished yet; I'd play the Polish Fantasy they demand and the Variations for You, which I'm just waiting for. Since the fair in Leipzig has already started, Brzezina will also get a transport. – The one who wanted to give me champagne at the second concert, that Frenchman from St. Petersburg, who was called Field, is one of Konserwis students. of Paris, called Dunst. He was at Soliwa's, he was supposed to be at my place, as the man told me, but I haven't seen him yet. He gave concerts in St. Petersburg and succeeded; so it must play well. You must be surprised that a Frenchman from St. Petersburg has a German surname. – Kocio with Skarżyński Walery just passed by, and Gendre is following them; carriages roll, women's hats are scattered from afar, beautiful time. – Well, and Celiński, my walk executor; kind, cares about my health. I'll go with him to the street, maybe I'll see someone who will remind me of you; and I only love you. F. Chopin. My parents send their bows and sincere greetings together with my sisters. ""And Mr. Alive,"" he would chide me. By the way, one of the funny news is that Orłowski made mazurkas and gallopades from my themes, which I asked him not to print. Count Ory is nice, especially the instrumentation and choirs. The finale of the first act is beautiful. [1] Dens le meilleur go?t polonais (French) – in the best Polish style."
"My dearest life! I feel some relief in unbearable longing, since I receive a letter from you; just what I needed today, because I was duller than ever. - I would like to reject the thoughts that poison my gaiety, but I enjoy caressing them, I don't know what I lack, and perhaps after writing a letter I will be calmer, because you know how nice it is to write to you. “You write to me that you have become a guardian, it made me laugh. You report some kind of cotillion, I'm guessing it's Valery's work; you mention that you might come, it made me happy, because I, too, am staying for the Sejm. You probably already know from the newspapers which, fortunately for me, you keep, that the opening is on May 28, so our hope lasts for a whole month, especially since the ""Kuryer"" announced Miss Sonntag. Dmuszewski is always the same, he's lying, he composes all sorts of brawls; I met him yesterday and he told me the good news that he puts a sonnet to me in the Courier. For the love of God, I asked him not to do anything stupid. ""Already printed,"" he answered with a smile, thinking that I ought to rejoice at the honor bestowed upon me. Oh, misunderstood favors! Those whom I have offended will have a field of mockery again. As for the mazurkas of my themes, the mercantile desire for profit prevailed. I no longer want to read what people write about me or listen to what they say. On Sunday I just wanted to listen to Kurp. discussing the article. ""Newspapers. Warsz."", but as if for disguise, among many learned people at Minasowicz's, I could not find a saint. He was not there, one of the musicians, Ernemann, was there with me. - But wanting to see the face he would show me, I went to him on holidays to wish Christmas, but both times I did not find him. I saw salt today. Possibly an Italian prank, but he showed me what he had written in response to that article (in French, by the way, for himself, not for publication in any public journal) and excellent; in general, he justly rebukes them for Elsner, without revealing whose name or name. ""Tender eyes, never mind, and I'm polite and don't see him despite his invitations, except when it's absolutely necessary."" – Ernemann visited me, he judged that the first Allo was better in the new Concerto – he just came yesterday when Kostuś was leaving. I was there today; because the Sejm, and therefore the departure to Dresden, was late, new projects; and the last one is that Kostuś with Hub, prof. Univ., with those who traveled last year, made a small journey through France and Italy. Hube, as he told me the other day, had a plan to rush straight to Paris, where, having stayed, he would spend the winter in Italy and January in Naples, where I was to see him. Kostus went out to Hube this morning to get close to him and find out the plan. If they go, it will be in June, and towards the end. My Variations haven't arrived yet. Magnus went to Vienna a week ago and is due back at the end of this month, not bare-handed, I hope. Tomorrow the Magic Flute, and the day after tomorrow a concert of one blind flutist, Mr. Grünberg, about whom I have already written to you. He wanted me to play at his concert. I had a happy excuse that I had already refused one, and that it would not be proper to make a difference in the choice. Malsdorf will play the violin for him. This is a lot from the Baron; Szabkiewicz on the clarinet, and yesterday I was again at Żyliński's, who also promised him to sing. He wanted me to go with him to Maierowa; I know she would do it and sing for me, but in her heart she would wince. So I preferred to give a room - and only dealt with selling some tickets. Mrs. Pruszak took ten. By the way, today during the lesson, Kramer's Etude was under my fingers, I learned from Mrs. Pruszak that you sent wheat to Gdańsk and that maybe you will come; about wheat (a farm message from Mr. Charl) he didn't write me anything, I replied because it's not my news. However wild it seems to me, you have work to do with the wheat; I believed because I know how sincerely you like to take care of what you have undertaken. Children would be interested in reading your letters, and because they will never get to it, because only I, and myself, silently read them every day. – Ludwika is sulking, the more so since I told her that there was no bow for her. Tomorrow is Russian Easter, I won't be on any holy day. I haven't eaten any holidays so little yet, not even at the Pruszaków on Monday or Sunday, I don't know where the noise of people and hams, women, etc., I didn't even stay for dinner. – It was going to be a big dinner, castellan Lewiński, Alfons, Mleczkowie, Dziewanowski, who seemed insufferable to me, all this was there. N. asked me to hold his son for baptism; I could not refuse, especially since it is the wish of the unhappy woman who is leaving for Gdańsk. Pruska is to be my cousin. It's kind of a secret from my parents, who don't seem to know about it. – You know that last week I made a plan to go to you for a week, but it didn't end well, especially since I have work to do; you have to write rape. Undoubtedly, if you are during the Sejm in Warsaw, you will come across my concert. I have a feeling - if I dream it, I will believe it, because I often dream about you. How often do I take night for day and day for night; how many times do I live in a dream and sleep in the day, worse if I sleep, because I always feel; and instead of gaining strength in this intoxication, as if in a dream, I am still getting tired and weaker - I beg You, love me. F. Chopin. Your parents bow to you beautifully, rakolin [?] and children, and Żywny. –"
"My dearest life! You must have been surprised that Fryc did not deign to answer your letter immediately, but I did not know what you were asking me about in that letter, so I had to stop. So learn, my dear, that Miss Sonntag will arrive in June, perhaps towards the end of May. Find out that Miss G. and W. are to appear during the Seym without fail, by virtue of a rescript issued by JWMinster Mostowski, one in Agnieszka Paera, and the other, that is W., in Turek. How do these selected operas seem to you? – I was at Soliwa's yesterday evening, where, apart from the Sauvans and Gressers, there was hardly anyone. G. sang an aria deliberately for her to the opera, added by Soliwa, which is supposed to be her signature piece, the places are indeed pretty and sometimes it found its way to her voice. In Turku, W. is also to sing one aria to show off, appropriate to her voice; this aria is by Rossyni, made for one of the most famous singers appearing in this opera. She sings it well. When you come, you'll find out. – I already think that you will not miss the opportunity to hear P. Sonntag. – How I thank this Miss Sonntag! – He is supposed to be in Gdańsk, and from there he is coming to us. “But we have a lot of musicians coming over here. And Mr. Woerlitzer, his father's pianist. Prussian majesty, has been here for 2 weeks now. Very nice little game. He is a Jew, and therefore by nature very docile, and has learned well some of the things he has let us hear. He was with me. He is even still a child, he is 16 years old. His forts are the Moscheles Variations on an Alexander March. It plays them perfectly, it seems that nothing remains to be desired. Twice he made himself heard in public, both times he played these Variations. When you hear him, you will be satisfied with his game, although between us, he still lacks a lot for the title he bears. – There is another Frenchman here, JPan Standt: he was thinking of giving a concert; he was with me and he thought of abandoning his intention. – But one of the amusing musical news is that Mr. Blahetka, the father of this pianist, wrote to me from Vienna that he would come if I advised him to come to the Sejm. Delicate matter. A German wants money, and if by any chance hope deceives him, he would feel sorry for me, so I wrote back immediately: ""I have been asked for a long time, that is, he will not undertake this journey, and that many people, and especially the whole musical world, wish this ”, but next to it I delicately exposed that Miss Sonntag will be there, that Lipiński will come, that there is one theater, in which the costs exceed 100 thalers, that there will be balls, that Pentecost is coming, that there will be many walks, etc., etc., so that I would not have nothing to throw away. – It may be that he will come; I would be happy, and for her I would do anything on my part, even if it came to playing for 2 pantalions, because you won't believe how much this German was good to me in Vienna. – Kostuś in Częstochowa with his mother, they return next week, and on the first of June they immediately go with Hub via Berlin to Paris, where, having stayed 2 1/2 or 3 1/2 months, they go through Switzerland to Italy. “As for my journey, now I don't know what will happen. I think that instead of going abroad this year, I will get a fever, and it will all be over. I'll sit through June, I'll sit through July, I won't even want to leave for, you know for sure, for nothing but heat; the Italian opera in Vienna will only start in September, as Henneberg said yesterday, so there is no need to rush and hurry, especially since the Rondo to the new Concerto is not finished – and for that you need inspiration; I'm not even in a hurry with it, because having the first Allegro, I don't care about the rest. I can play a concert again, because I haven't played my Variations yet, and those, as Blahetka reported to me in a letter, have recently come out and Haslinger went with them to Leipzig for the Easter Fair. I expect that when Magnus returns from Vienna (he went to Galicia for his own business, and from there was to go to Vienna), he will bring them to me. The Adagio from the new Concerto is in E major. It is not supposed to be strong, it is more romantic, calm, melancholic, it should give the impression of a nice look at the place where a thousand pleasant reminders come to mind. – It is a kind of musing in a beautiful spring time, but with the moon. That is why I accompany it with sordins, that is, violins muffled by a kind of combs that, straddling the pages, give them a kind of nasal silver tonic. - Maybe it's wrong, but why be ashamed of writing badly despite your knowledge - only the error will show the result. “In this you must measure my tendency to do wrong involuntarily. Like, despite my will, something entered my mind through my eyes and I like to caress myself with it, maybe the most wrong way. You probably understand me. – I also kept N. with Mrs. Pruska my son for baptism, who was adopted; you won't believe what a nice guy. ""Miss Dupont this morning at On the 7th she married Mr. Cechowski, Mrs. Skrodzka's brother. – Bixel doktór, that old, 63-year-old doctor, married his late wife to his niece, a 17-year-old miss. The whole church was full of curious people, and it was strange for the bride that they felt so sorry for her - I know this from the lips of the bridesmaid Moriolówna, where as soon as I take the letter to the post office, I'm going to visit her, because she sent it; you know that these are my loves, which I admit very willingly, so you have to be obedient and respect the covers of hidden feelings. “You know that I have not thought of myself to be as secretive as I am when I do not have the heart to confide to You what ails me. I'm at the theater today. JPan Smochowski, a new tragedian from Lviv, will play the role of Werowski in Teresa, the orphan from Geneva. I don't have high hopes for his game, but I'll see what's up there. “They say Pasta is coming, but I doubt it. – The news about the famous (admittedly a bit past) singer Mrs. Milder Hauptmann is more certain. Romberg was also kind of expected. Let them come, I'm trying for you [?] and I hope you'll be at my concert this time. I think that at the end of May, that is in 2 weeks, I will try the first Allegro at home. At the beginning of June, I play to get rid of it before the start of general games announced by ""Kuryer"". So write to me when you will surely be in Warsaw, because it would be worse than the first time that I had to perform a showpiece act without you. No, you don't know how much I love you, I can't show it to you - and I want you to know it for so long. Ah, if I could shake your hand, what would I give for that, you wouldn't guess... half of a miserable life. F. Chopin. I'm not telling you the concert schedule, because I don't know it yet. I will try to have Teichmann. At my second concert, he was supposed to sing a duet from Armida with Maierowa, because he is afraid to perform in a solo, but unfortunately, a week ago, Cymmermanowa and Polkowski sang this duet, so Kurpiński did not wish that the same, as if to show they can sing better. He wrote backwards, and I would like to write more. I was going to send you a new waltz, just for a toy, but you'll pick it up next week. Parents and children are bowing cutely. Mr. Lively also counts in this."
"My dearest life! You missed 5 concerts of Miss Sonntag! – But don't regret it, because you'll hear it again, if it's true that you're coming on the 13th. The thirteenth falls on a Sunday, and you're on your way, while I'm going to try the first Allegro of the 2nd Concerto at home, taking advantage of the absence of Miss Sonntag, who told me yesterday with her pretty lips that she was leaving for Fischbach at the summons of the King of Prussia. You won't believe how much pleasure I had in getting to know you more closely, that is, in the room on the sofa, because you know that we don't get into more about this divine messenger, as some local enthusiasts rightly called her. – X-Że Radziwiłł presented me to her in the most beautiful way, for which I am very grateful to him. – However, during her week-long stay with us, I did not make much use of my acquaintance, because I saw how tired she was always from the strangely boring visits of Castellans, Senators, Voivodes, Generals and Adjutants who sat there to look at her slippers and about the weather to talk. She receives them most politely, for she is so good-hearted that she could not be rude, but yesterday, in order to go to the rehearsal, she had to shut herself up in the room to put her hat on her head, because the butler in the anteroom can't handle it. with check-in. – I would not visit her even once, but she demanded to see me because of one song, which Radziwiłł had arranged for her and recommended me to write down. These are variations on Ukrainian dumka; the theme and end are nice, but I don't like the middle, nor do Miss Sonntag, who I've changed a bit, but always not very well. – I am glad that after today's concert he is going, because the trouble will disappear from my head, and in the meantime, maybe Radziwiłł will come at the end of the Sejm and resonate [1] with his variations. “Miss Sonntag is not beautiful, but pretty to the highest degree. He charms everyone with his voice, which is not very great, because only we usually hear it from: [note example] but it is extremely refined; her diminuenda are non plus ultra [2], her portamenta [3] beautiful, and the gammas, especially the chromatic ones, are delicious to the top. She sang us Merkadantego's aria very, very, very nicely, Rode's Variations, especially the roulade, the last one very well; Variations on the Swiss theme were so popular that she sang them again instead of big curtseys when called out to thank her! This kindness is indescribable. Yesterday it was the same with Rode's Variation. She sang us a cavatina from The Barber, the famous one, and from Sroka; you can tell the difference from anything you've heard now. She sang this aria from Freyszyca, what do you know, wonderfully. – I was also at her place once, when I found Soliwa with the Pannami – they sang his duet next to me, what is something, barbara sorte [4], at the end this major, you already know; Miss Sonntag told them that their voices were overblown and that their method was good, but they had to make their voice heard in a different way if they didn't want to lose it completely after two years. – In front of me, she told Wołkówna that she had a lot of ease, many beautiful manners, but ""une voix trop aigue"" [5], and she asked them very much to visit her more often, she would show them her ways as much as possible. - This is supernatural politeness, it is coquetry advanced to such an extent that it completely turns into naturalness, because it cannot be supposed that a man could become so natural without knowing all the resources of coquetry. ""She's a million times prettier and more pleasant in her morning dress than in her evening dress, though those who haven't seen her in the morning love her."" – When she comes back, she will give her concerts until 10 pm, after which she thinks of going, as I know from her mouth, to St. Petersburg - hurry up, come so you don't lose more than these 5 concerts. – They say very much that Pasta is coming too. They have to sing together. – There is also a certain Miss Belleville here, a Frenchwoman, she plays the piano very nicely, extremely lightly, elegantly, 10 times better than Woerlitzer; gives a concert on Wednesday. She was at the court for that famous musical evening where Miss Sonntag was. The two ladies showed off. There was also Woerlitzer, but he didn't like it that much, which I know from Kurpiński, who accompanied Miss Sonntag at the court. People wondered why I wasn't there, but I wasn't surprised. – Pruszak Kocio is leaving today at 4 o'clock in the afternoon with Hub. Mrs. Pruszak with Oleś and the rest escorts them as far as Łowicz, from there they go on their own horses to Kalisz, and from there by extramail. “But a bit more about Sonntag. – He has some embroidery of a completely new kind, with which he makes a great impression, but still not such as Paganini. Maybe it's because the type is smaller. It seems that she breathes on the ground floor some fragrance of the freshest flowers and caresses, lovingly stroking, but rarely moving to tears. – Radziwiłł said that Desdemona plays and sings the last scene in Othello in such a way that no one can refrain from tears. I was just telling her about it, if she wouldn't like to sing this scene for us in a costume (because she's supposed to be an excellent actress at that), she replied that true, she often saw tears in the eyes of spectators, but she was tired of acting on stage, and she gave herself her word roleplaying as much as possible. ""Come and rest after country toil in the bosom of friendship, Miss Sonntag will sing to you, and thus you will gain new strength for your employments."" What a pity that I cannot send myself instead of a letter. You might not want me, but I want you and I'm waiting with my mustache shaved. F. Chopin. Miss Sonntag sings something from Semiramis today. Her concerts are short, she usually sings 4 times and in between no one plays except the orchestra, and indeed you need a rest after her singing, it's so busy. – Maidens from the Cannery. will not occur this month. Miss Belleville played my printed Wari. in Vienna and even knows one by heart. It is a pity that there is nowhere to write anymore, because I don't want to get up from the letter, I don't want to tear myself away from you - do you love me too? Because that's how it pierces the paper, so I'm forced to make an envelope. Papa, Mom, children, Lively and all. Gąsie says that when you come, he will tell you what he was supposed to write. [1] He will renoncer (from French renoncer) – he will give up, he will give up. [2] Diminuenda... non plus ultra - volume down... extraordinary. [3] Portementa - transitions from one note to another. [4] Barbara sorte (Latin) – in a bizarre way. [5] Une voix trop aigue (French) - voice too harsh. [6] Broderie (French) – here: vocal embellishments."
"Disgusting Hypocrite! The second is my letter, which I am writing to you, you will not believe it, you will say that Fryc is lying, but this time I am honest. – Fortunately, having returned to Warsaw with the Baron, I immediately wrote to you, but since my parents were in Żelazowa Wola, it was very natural that I, too, having not stayed in Warsaw for a long time, left a letter for you, which was to be delivered to the post office; returning again, already with my parents, on Tuesday, I found a letter to you written happily in the same place, by the cups, where I had left it on my departure. Karol, who visited us during my absence, told me that he had seen this letter on the cups. Every cloud has a silver lining. Maybe in this letter I won't be telling you as much as in the first one, when I had your poturzyn rows fresh in my mind. – I will honestly tell you that it is pleasant for me to remember all this – your fields left me with some longing – this birch tree under the windows cannot leave my memory. That arbalest! - how romantic! I remember that arbalest, which You tormented me for it, for all my sins. ""But I must give you an account of the time that has elapsed, I must tell you when I am definitely leaving, I must write to you many more necessary things."" – Aniela first took care of me in Warsaw. I was on display. Gładkowska is hardly missing. It's better on stage than in the hall. I am not talking about the tragic, excellent playing, because there is nothing to say, and as for the singing, if it weren't for those fis ig, sometimes at the top, we wouldn't need anything better in this kind. If she phrases it, you would enjoy it, she shades parade, and although at first her voice was shaking at the entrance, later she sang very boldly. The opera was shortened. Maybe that's why I didn't find the bug of boring length in her. Soliwa's aria has the greatest effect in the second act; I knew it could make an effect, but I didn't expect such a big one. Romance, which she sings in the second act with the harp (Ernemann plays the piano behind her backstage without damaging the illusion), she sang very nicely last time. I was pleased. At the end, Aniela was summoned and applauded profusely. From today, next week there is an admission to the Fiovilla stage in Turku. I like Wolków better. You need to know that Aniela has a lot of antagonists who don't know why they criticize music. – I do not deny that the Italian could have chosen something better for Gładkowska, as a Vestal may have brought her more happiness, but it is also beautiful, and it has many rare beauties and difficulties wonderfully rendered by a debutante. Szczurowski is terrible; some Talma, Kemble, Devrient and Żółkowski pass through it; don't know what it is, but the perfect madman. – Zdanowicz, according to Soliwa, is non plus ultra. Salomonowicz is unhappy, Nawrocka continues to drawl, and Żyliński digests on stage. – Just yesterday, at Turk's rehearsal, he was angering me with his cold soul, like counting sticks to Turk. - Wołków sang well, she also plays very well - a role that she would undoubtedly play and really know how to play. He can do more with his eyes than with his throat. Up to D high, he takes a few times very cleanly and boldly. I have no doubt that she likes it better than Gładkowska. – The quintet was going splendidly. The general was happy. Kostus in Frankfurt with Kincel and back to Milan, Trieste and Vienna. Hube is still behind and will not be in Rome until the 15th of next month. What am I doing? - For next month x I am leaving, but first I must try my Concerto, because the Rondo is finished. Tomorrow Kaczyński and Bielawski are at my place. In the morning at 10 o'clock incognito, with Elsner, Ernemann, Żywny and Linowski, I try my Polonaise with violoncella and Trio. We will play to death. For this reason, I asked no one except those mentioned above and Matuszyński, who only remained kind to me, not such a false Hypocrite, Rogue, Scoundrel as, guess who! – Kostuś told me to bow to Miss Palczewskie. Pruszakowa in Marienbad - they went there to drink water, and so did Mleczko. My favorite Pietruś Girls. stayed on the road in Reinertz and uses whey there. – I saw Oborski at ""Rozmaitości"" - he was good. - Walery with diamond buttons, with a banker's face, pharaohs in the streets. Wincenty was always good, perfect, just like a good clerk was. Łączyński, who is probably still with you, as if I were in his place, I saw him the next day, after arriving in Warsaw, he must have told you. The baron is serving a term, he is staying with Conte, and I have only seen him once since his return; mother still very bad, I know from his mouth. I saw the Castellan yesterday; I spoke to him about you. - Charles must have already left, because he was supposed to return to the estate. – Hamle t today, I'm going for it. Yesterday, Miss Rywoli, the new Cow, played the role (Olesia Pruszak) explained by Gaszyński - les premiers amours. Niwiński plays your part well, Jasiński plays the part of Kocio better than Kocioł, my part is played by Szymanowski almost like me, terribly far from Heroch, and Kratzer, when he lives, has not come up with a better way to expel rats. Kucharski against this c'est du Cherubini. ""I'm in a hurry, because I'll take the letter to the post office myself, so that this poor fellow won't stay at home like his brother."" Next week I won't be able to refrain from scolding you for what I was supposed to write today, so that's enough. – I do not want anything from you, not even a handshake, you have disgusted me forever, you monster of hell. Give me a kiss. F. Chopin. If there are any letters to me, send them back retro. - Forgive me what I wrote, because today I am even dumber than ever. Papa and Mama, and little sisters - everything bows to you beautifully."
"Dearest Tycie! I also needed your letter - I lost my runny nose when I received it. If only my letters could have salutary effects! So that after reading them you can lose falsehood and hypocrisy, how glad I would be. But what this letter, I am sure, will not have that effect, and indeed, it seems to me, it will provoke new crimes, it will generate anger in this lion's heart, and it is good that I am forty miles away, otherwise all the severity of revenge may be at once she had on me. A great offense, but pleasing to the heart of the offender; I'm sitting in Warsaw - and if I love you, nothing draws me to the country. You can believe me that next week, that is in September (because tomorrow is the 1st), I will leave, but I will leave to make amends to my vocation and reason (which must be very small when there is not enough strength to destroy everything else in my head). – I am approaching the road, because this week I am supposed to rehearse the entire Concerto with a quartet, so that first this quartet can communicate with me – get used to it a bit, without which, Elsner says, the rehearsal with the orchestra would not come to order right away . Linowski prescribes for rape, but Rondo has already started. I tried the trio last Sunday, I don't know, maybe because I haven't heard it for a long time, but I was quite pleased with myself (lucky man!), Only one idea came to my mind to use the viola instead of the violin, because the fifth resonates most with the violin , and the least played on it, the viola will be stronger against the violoncella, which is written in its proper sphere, and for printing. It's about me. Now about the other musicians - you will say that here too I adhered to the rules of egoism given to me by you. Last Saturday, Soliwa made out Miss Wołków, who charmed all the armchairs and the ground floor with her flirtatiousness, good playing and very pretty eyes and teeth. She was as pretty as any of our actresses; but in the first act I could not recognize her voice. She came in lavishly dressed, walking to the seashore ... with binoculars in her hand, her eyes shooting ... she twisted so tasty that no one would believe that she was a debutante. However, despite the huge applause and shouting, she was so frightened that I recognized her only in the second act, in an aria not yet sung as well as in the second, the previous performance, where the first act went differently. When it comes to singing, Gładkowska is incomparably superior and seeing Wołków on stage I did not even expect such a difference. Together with Ernemann, we decided that there would be no second Gładkowska in terms of purity and intonation, and the higher feeling she possessed on stage. Wołkówna can sometimes be falsified, while in the meantime I have also heard that one in Aniela, and she doubtlessly did not pick up a single note. Seeing [them] the other day, I recited your compliments, for which they thanked you very much. The reception of the Volks, as Celiński told me, was more splendid than the reception of the other one, which must concern the Italian, because he told me yesterday that he would not like this one better than the other one, but he sees that it will be. This, however, must be attributed to Turk, or rather Rossini, who, on our audience, enchanted by the dress and what is underneath the young girl's dress, makes a greater impression than all the regrets of the unhappy daughter and the most beautiful ecstasies of Paer. Gładkowska is due to perform in Sroka soon, this ""soon"" will certainly happen then, when I will be behind the trenches. – Maybe then you will find yourself in Warsaw, then you will tell me your opinion. Her third role is to be in Vestal. Wołków what will play, I do not know. I was also in a POW camp the other day. Shembeck for the second time. You must know that he always stays strong in Sochaczew and he made an appointment with Michał to take me to him. However, when this did not come to fruition, Tchaikovsky, the brother of that Miss Tchaikovsky who plays and fogs, sent an adjutant, and they took me there. Szembek is very musical, he plays the violin well, he once studied with Rode, and he is a paganist, so he belongs to this good caste of musicians. He made his music play, which was exalted all morning, and I heard strange things. All this on trumpets called Bugla; you would not think that they do chromatic scales as fast as possible and diminuendo down. Until I had to praise the soloist, who, poor man, soon, I see, will be able to serve, because he looks consumptive, and still young enough. It puzzled me greatly what cavatina from Mute on those trumpets I heard with all accuracy and shading. He has a piano in the camp and I don't know where from, but he understood me, he didn't pretend. The Adagio made the greatest impression on him, he did not give me a room until I was late for the Turk. By the way, in one Berlin newspaper there is a very long article about music in Warsaw. Where he first speaks of Aniela, he praises her very rightly in terms of singing, feeling, as well as playing, and then he writes: ""This young artist came from the institute founded under the leadership of Mr. Elsner and Mr. Soliwa. The first of them, a professor of composition, formed several students, among them Mr. Orłowski, Chopin and others, who in time can contribute to "", etc., etc. Let the devil take such a companion. “On vous a joliment collé” [1] – said the red-eyed Fredon [2] Bouquet, and Ernemann added that I should be lucky to sit in the second place. The article does not say anything more about these students and ends immediately afterwards: ""As for the evaluation of the works of JMs Elsner, Soliwa and Kurpiński, we leave it for later."" Complete nonsense of some wise Varsovian. I would have forgotten about Rinaldi - for God's sake, either through Łączyński, or otherwise send this book, because Italy will not give me peace; the devil seized me that I forgot about this book on my departure from the Poturzynskis. Kostuś is to be in Vienna next month with Kincel, so old Pruszak told me, later he will join his mother in Dresden and return to Warsaw, while Hube in Italy will be rocking. ""My brow hurts when I think of Italy, it seems to me... Enough of this nonsense; forgive me, my love, that I myself do not know what I have written to you, as always, but you have enough income from hreczka to pay for the letter, even if there is nothing in it than a piece of paper from my hands and my signature, which is a hellish signature I am always ready to mark a coregraf [!] for you. Skarżyński Win. I saw a long time yesterday. He loves you, he asked a lot about you. Everyone about Olesya, and nobody talks to me about someone. And I am happy that a secret has sunk in my heart, that in me the end of what you begin. You are happy that you have an abyss in me, into which you can throw everything without fear, as if to another self, because your spirit has been lying there for a long time at the very bottom. I hide your letters like a lover's ribbon. I have a ribbon; write to me, I will pamper you again in a week. Yours forever F. Chopin. Parents and sisters sincere greetings. Ludwika thanks you for the congratulations I read to her. Żywny said to hug you, friends, as Max, Soliwa, etc., bows. I still feel sorry for that paper; just imagine when Miss F. wants me to join her, teach me how to play the piano and there d... Papa's not because of that, because he pushed me to her several times, he visits me, but I don't like her appetite. Poor girl, she has to play a concert, and she can't do anything, I advised her Ernemann, and Ernemann did not want to and advised Dobrzyński - she says that she from Lithuania and that one from Lithuania will get together. These are guys. [1] On vous a joliment collé (French) – they put you in nicely. [2] Fredonizing - here: humming."
"Dearest Tycie! I'm telling you, hypocrite, I'm already going crazy as usual. - I'm still sitting - I don't have enough strength to decide the day, I think I'm leaving so that I can forget about home forever; I think I'm going to die - and how sad it must be to die somewhere else, not where you lived. How awful it will be for me to see a cold doctor or a manservant at the deathbed instead of my family. – Believe me, sometimes I would go to [C]hodkiewicz to look for peace with you, and yes, I leave the house, go to the street, miss you and come back home again, why? - in order to linger. I haven't tried the Concerto yet; however it may be, before Saint Michael I will abandon all my treasures and be in Vienna, doomed to eternal sighs. What is this deception? ""You who know his strength so well, explain to me why it seems to me that today will only be tomorrow?"" Don't be stupid, that's all I can give myself - if you have another, come to me. Orłowski in Paris, Norblin promised to find him a place at the Theater des Varietés by the new year. Le Sueur received him well and promised to remember his musical training. A friend can come out well if he wants to. My thoughts about winter are that in Vienna 2 months, and then to Italy, even if you spend the winter in Milan. I will have letters. Moriollówna returned from the waters yesterday. Ludwik Rembieliński is in Warsaw, I saw him at Lours's, where I entered a dispute with Ernemann about a Turk and Agnieszka, an Italian and a Pole. Soliwa conducts operas in which his girls have performed; slowly you will see that Kurpiński's saddle already has one leg in the stirrup and is supported by a brave, mustachioed cavalryman. He also has Osiński on his website. Palstet saw Rastawiecka a few days before her death, he said that she knew about her condition. Palstetowa told you to say that she was angry that you did not take me by force to Telatyn. These are women's banter, which the older the woman, the more unbearable they become for people who only like to banter with one person. Alpine singers in the theater today; it's something like the Tyroleans they were 2 years ago - you probably remember. Gresser told me they were worse, and ""Kuryer Warszawski"" said they were better. I will not go to them today, I prefer to hear them on Wednesday in Resursa in the Mniszkowski palace. It's going to be a big evening, and they're going to sing in the garden. The process that took place between the two legs of Resursa, that is, between Zejdler, Zakrzewski, etc., and Steinkeler, Żelazowski, etc., Win told me. Skarżyński that his side has lost, but they are appealing. They are honey: (because they live on Miodowa Street), and the Steinkelers are called the Mniszkowskis. This explanation was needed to tell you that the honeys lost, but not legally. Buchholtz finished his instrument ? la Streicher, it plays well, better than his Viennese, but far from Viennese Viennese. Today I will finish the letter with nothing, even more than nothing, because I have already written, and that is because it is half past twelve; and I sit and write undressed, while Moriolka waits for me, then to Celiński for dinner, then I promised to be at Magnuszewski's and I would not have time to come before 4 am to write you down to the bottom of this quarter, the vanity of which I grieve and suffer, and advise I can't. Whatever I write to you, it seems to me that I am doing well. I can't exalt in today's letter, because it's like I let go. Moriolka would not see me today, and I like to make other honest people happy, if I am convinced of their kindness. I have not yet returned, and I confess to you that I often blame her for the cause of my sadness, and thus it seems to me that people believe, and I am calm on the surface. My father will laugh, which might make him cry - and I will laugh, but also on the surface. We will go, my love, to Italy; from today a month from now you won't have a letter from Warsaw, maybe you won't have a letter from anywhere else; until we see each other, you won't know anything about me. ""Duby, androns are one thing I can do, but get out of town - and so will you."" I will wait for you. I will receive letters: ""I am finishing the mill, and I am building a distillery, and this is wool, and this is lamb, the second sowing will finally come"", and it will not be a mill, not a distillery, not wool, which will stop you, but ... it will be that's something different. Not always a satisfied man; perhaps a few moments in life are only to be enjoyed, and why should one detach oneself from these illusions, which cannot last so long anyway. ""Just as I consider social relations to be the most sacred thing on the one hand, so on the other hand I maintain that it is an invention of the devil, and it would be better for the people of the world not to know money, melszpyz, shoes, hats, byfaztics, pancakes, etc., how people they know it all. This is the saddest case of my reasoning, I know that you also think so, that you would prefer not to know. I'm going to wash up, don't kiss me now because I haven't washed up yet. - You? Even if I smeared myself with Byzantine oils, you wouldn't kiss me if I hadn't magnetically forced you to do so. There is some force in nature. Today you will dream that you kiss me. I have to repay you for the hideous dream I had last night. F. Chopin, always an amateur of Personified Hypocrisy. By the way: write to me and remember about Rinaldi, nothing else. Mom and Papa send you beautiful bows. The children have come down from above lest I forget; and please write that I forgot to bow from them. Lively always reminds me of his bow. The Italian Soliwa asked me when you would be in Warsaw, and he bowed to you strongly. Lindowa in Gdańsk. I did not see your sister in Warsaw. Plater returned."
"My dearest life! Hypocrite disgusting! Disgusted, disgusted Count Ory! Abelard, etc. I don't know why, but I'm fine, Father and Mother are pleased with it. Through P[oletyłła] I received a letter and a book, you couldn't have done better than to send the book back, because an Italian always bothered me in the street. Tried my Quartet Concert last Wednesday. I was satisfied, but not very much - people say that the last finale is the prettiest (because it is the most understandable). How it turns out with the orchestra, I'll write you next week, because I'm going to try it this Wednesday. Tomorrow again in the quartet I want to do. – If I try, I will go, but where, when nothing is pulling me anywhere. However, I do not think of staying in Warsaw, and if you have any suspicions of love, like many people in Warsaw, reject them and see for yourself that I could be superior to everything as far as my self is concerned, and if I were in love, I would stay a few years longer he was able to hide his wretched and feeble enthusiasms. Judge as you like, but a letter from the count, whom I met the other day in Podwale and promised to grace our thresholds with his pudgy figurine before his departure, will explain the matter to you best. I don't want to go with you. I am not making it up, but as I love you, that moment, more pleasant than thousands of monotonously spent days, in which we would embrace each other for the first time abroad, would perish. I would no longer be able to expect you, could not receive you, could not talk, as they say when contentment closes the access to all cold, forced words and the heart speaks to one another in some divine language. divine tongues! What an unhappy expression, like divine navel or divine liver; it's terribly material-ugly. ""But let's go back to the moment when I see you there."" Then perhaps I would not have transferred on myself and would have told you what I always dream, what I see everywhere, what I hear constantly, and what in the world gives me the greatest pleasure and the greatest sadness. But don't think that I'm going to be in love - I'm putting it off until later. I started the Polonaise with orchestra, but it's just beginning, there's a beginning, but there's no beginning. – I found out about Kamieński differently than I thought in the countryside. And you will learn more about it through P. For today I am writing an anticipando [1] to satisfy you that I will not go before Saint Michael. This is the clearest point. I see you throwing my letter and blushing with anger. Brother, not as we want, but as we can. Also, don't think pocket money will stop me. The arguments are not very important, but as much as they need weight to be useful, they are by God's grace - and that's not a problem. It is therefore difficult for me to protect myself from the well-deserved position of the Berlin newspaper, fortunately, that the Viennese newspaper wrote differently about me in its review of my Variations. It is short, but so lush, so high, so deep and at the same time philosophical that it cannot be explained. He concludes that these Variations, apart from external embellishments, have an internal advantage that will always remain. – A German wrote me a compliment; I will thank him when I see him. However, there is nothing exaggerated and it is as I wish, because it grants me independence here. – If it weren't for you, I wouldn't dwell on myself so much, but since you care about me, and I would like to care about you, I'm boasting, as merchants often get away with goods. – Second place after Orłowski is neither too much nor too little for me. Today they are giving his new ballet with the enormous machines of Monsieur Lesbenier for the first time. They promise fights. – Yesterday I was at Cichocki's, the fat one, on his name day. I played Spohr's Quintetto for piano, clarinet, bassoon, French horn and flute. Lovely. But not terribly so. Everything he intentionally wanted to write for the piano to show off is unbearably difficult and it is often impossible to find fingers. This quintet was supposed to be played at 7 o'clock and we started it at 11 o'clock. You're surprised I haven't fallen asleep! But there was such a pretty lady, who reminded me very much of my ideal. Imagine, I was up until 3 o'clock. The quintet was so late because the ballet rehearsal lasted until 11:00. From this measure what a huge ballet it is. They're piling up today. Yesterday I wrote to Bartek in London. Antoś Wodziński returned from Vienna. I will go there without fail, but I cannot set a day for you. I was supposed to start a week from today on the Krakow stagecoach, but I let it go. I know you think me completely dissuaded on this point. I only ask you to be convinced that I also think about my good, and as I love you, I will devote everything that is done for people. for people! It is for the human eye that opinion, which means a lot to us, should not contribute to my misfortune, never internal, but superficial. For people often call misfortune a coat with holes, an old hat, etc. things. - If I don't have anything to eat, you must accept me as a writer at Potuczyn; I will live there near the stables as well with you as I did this year at the manor. As long as my health served me - I think I will work all my life. A couple of times I wondered if I was really lazy too; or should I work more when my physical strength is sufficient. - No kidding, I found out that I am not one of those last idlers yet and that I can work, when the need compels, twice as much as today. You will admit that I cannot better accuse myself before You than by acquitting myself. Free, I know that I love you, I want you to love me too, more and more, and that's why I doodle so much. Often those who want to improve themselves, make them worse. But I don't think I can make anything better or worse for you. “The sympathy I have for you compels your heart by supernatural means to feel a similar sympathy. You are not the master of what you think, but I am the master, and I will not let myself be abandoned as the trees of that greenness that gives them their quality, gaiety, life can be abandoned. And in winter it will be green for me. Green in the head, but God forbid that the greatest heat is in the heart, so there is no wonder that such vegetation. Enough! Give me a kiss for the last, forever your F. Chopin. Only now do I see that I have spun you too many androns, you can see that yesterday's imagination still works, that I did not get enough sleep, also forgive the fatigue, because I danced a mazurka. Mom, Papa hug you the hardest. Children too. Ludwika a little weak, expect it to be better. I met the president, who was happy with the count's arrival and has letters for you through him, or packets, or something to send from Gdańsk. Valery always Valery. Neighbor, Miss Kolubakin, died, Wincenty is healthy, beautiful. Kostus is said to be in Dresden with everyone. Sokolowska arrived. Weak always. Your letters by my heart and by the ribbon, because although they don't know each other, they feel (those dead things) that they both came from familiar hands. [1] Anticipando (Italian) - ahead of time."
"My dearest life! By chance I can explain to you why I'm still sitting. My father really didn't want me to leave a few weeks ago because of the disturbances that are taking place all over Germany. Apart from the provinces on the Rhine, the Saxons, who already have another king, Brunswick, Cassel, Darmstadt, etc., it was heard that even in Vienna several thousand people began to sulk over flour. What they wanted from the flour, I don't know, but that it was something, I know. They also screwed up in Tyrol. Italy is just boiling, and at any moment, Moriollo told me, they expect some news in this regard. I have not applied for a passport yet, but people insist that they should not give it to me except to Austria and Prussia, and not to think of Italy and France. And I know that several people have been completely denied passports, which would certainly not happen to me. So I will certainly leave Krakow in a few weeks for Vienna, because there they refreshed their memory about me again, so I have to take advantage of it. Don't blame me or my parents. That's all the romance. — P[oletyłło] visited me yesterday, he is leaving very early tomorrow, and since I am rehearsing the second Concerto today with a complete orchestra, except for trumpets and timpani, so to please you, I invited him; let him tell you too. I know that the smallest details in this regard interest you. I regret that you are not here, because according to Ernemann's opinion I will have to judge about the Concerto. There will be Kurpiński, Soliwa, and the whole best musical world, but I don't really believe these gentlemen, with the exception of Elsner. I am curious how the Italian will look at Kapellmeister, Czapek at Kessler, Filip at Dobrzyński, Molsdorf at Kaczyński, Le Doux at Sołtyk and Mr. P[oletyłło] at all of us. There was no example of seeing these gentlemen all together once. I can do it and I do it for the rarity. From diplomatic news, the latest news is that Mr. Durand, the former French consul, who protested against Philip and wanted to accept Russian service, was recalled back to France, and yesterday a new tricolor consul arrived in his place, whose name even the diplomats do not know yet. – There is also a new bass player, Mr. Bondasiewicz, who unfortunately has already twice in Turek and in Cyrulik, in place of Szczurowski, has made a fool of himself. Apart from the not-so-worst vocal supson, there is not the slightest advantage. He sings cleanly enough, that's probably the only thing that could have caused the Kapellmeister to let him perform on the first Polish stage. You need to know that this Mr. Bondasiewicz, whom our audience has already converted to Brinda, Banda and Bombasiewicz, once delighted his listeners in the provinces. It's so bad with us that you have to slow down all the pace, otherwise he won't make it. Maybe it will form yet, because it is not old. Szczurowski was ill, so he replaced him. It's good that he has recovered and that he can perform in Sroka on Sunday, where Anusia (or whoever) will be sung by Panna Gładkowska conducted by Kurpiński. This, however, will not prevent the Italian from taking the place of Kapellmeister in a few years, because Kurpińsio is applying for a place in St. Petersburg (confidentiality made to me secretly). After the speech of Miss Gład. Miss Wołków will appear in Sroka in Cyrulik, which I will certainly never see again. You may have known Woycicki - you didn't know him, so I won't write anything about him. I've already finished the second Concerto, and still such hebes [1], as before starting to learn the keys. It's too original, I won't be able to learn at the end. It's a pity that on such a day I had to write what I think I can't put together. When I think about myself, I feel so sorry that somehow consciousness often leaves me. If I have something before my eyes that interests me, horses may run me over and I won't know, and I almost had it happen in the street the other day; on Sunday, struck by one unexpected glance in church, just in a moment of some pleasant stupor, having flown out immediately, I did not know what had happened to me for a quarter of an hour, and meeting Paris the doctor, I did not know how to explain my confusion to him, I had to make a a dog that crawled under my feet and I stepped over it. Sometimes I get so crazy that it's scary. ""I'd like to send you some crappy stuff of mine, but I don't know if I'll have time to copy it today."" The Italian Rinaldi is pleased and thanks you for sending him the book. He told me that Bezobrazov takes lessons from him, but doesn't learn anything, only pays; I assure you that this is the first step to Miss Wołków. Orłowski's new ballet, as far as the music is concerned, is indeed very good, and many beautiful places. The machinery is huge and therefore not always successful. The first time was the worst, the second time was better, and the third time I don't know, but the Prince was, so it must have gone well. The last decoration is the best. They kick too much. terribly long. It ends at half past 11. What a letter today, I sincerely apologize to you, but you can't have another one, today is my holiday. The university also starts today, I have to go to reassure myself about Elsner, Bielawski, desks, and sordins, which I completely forgot about yesterday; for without them Adagio would have fallen, whose success cannot be so great, as far as I believe. Effective roundabout, strong Allegro. O cursed self-love! But if to whom, it is to you, egoist, that I owe self-conceit; with what he ceases, so he becomes. I do not follow you in one more thing, that is, in making sudden decisions, but I have a sincere desire to silently, without saying anything, decide to leave from Saturday next week, without pardon, despite the laments, crying, complaining and falling at my feet. Notes in a stamp, a ribbon to the soul, a soul on the arm and in a stagecoach. Tears like peas will fall from all sides along and across the city, from Copernicus to Zdrojów, from Blank to King Sigismund, and I will laugh like a cold and dry stone at the poor children who will bid me farewell so tenderly. I use the auxiliary word too often; but today, because God willing, if... not that you are far, far away, het, somewhere beyond Hrubieszów, I would have told you to come, and I know that you would like (at least for penance, for your other huge offenses ) bring comfort to other people, even if you hate them. If I could console you, I would do it, but believe me, there is no cure for all this, only in Vienna. You live, you feel, you are alive, you are felt by others, so you are miserable-happy. I understand you, I penetrate your spirit and... let's hug each other because we can't talk anymore. F. Chopin. I was badly squeezed out. ""That's why I have to put it in an envelope."" Forgive me for being such a pig, entre nous soit dit [2] – but God bless you. Just don't be angry anymore. Today I learned that there is new unrest in Berlin. [1] Hebes (Latin) – undeveloped, stupid. [2] Entre nous soit dit (French) – speaking between us."
"My dearest life! I needed your letter to keep me going, you won't believe how tired I am of this accursed but natural delusion. After the orchestra rehearsal of the 2nd Concerto, the decision was made to play it publicly, and next Monday, on the 11th of this month, I will perform with it. On the one hand, I am not happy about it, on the other hand, I am curious about the overall effect. Rondo, I think everyone will be impressed. For Rondo Soliwa told me: il vous fait beaucoup d'honneur [1] , Kurpiński spoke about originality, Elsner talked about rhythm. However, so that (because I can arrange what is called a beautiful evening) there would be no unhappy clarinets or bassoons between the piano, so in one part Gładkowska and in the second part Wołków will sing. For the overture, I will give neither Leszek nor Lodoiska, usually played, but Wilhelm Tell. How poor I was before these young ladies were allowed to sing, you won't believe it. The Italian willingly allowed it, but above I was ordered to go as far as Mostowski, who most willingly (because it didn't matter to him) allowed it. – What will they sing, I don't know yet; it was only the Italian who told me that choirs were needed for one aria. Only 2 national teams were Magpies. Gładkowska, performing for the first time, was a bit afraid and did not sing the first cavatina as well as the second time. It's admirable when she sings this: [note example], she doesn't make it short like Mayer's, but she does it long: [note example] so that it's not a quick grupetto, but a well-sung eight note. A prayer from Rossini's Mohammed was added, or rather inserted into the last act, after the funeral march, which was very good for her voice, because the one in Magpie was too high. This is a report from the opera. Now Wołków is learning Cyrulik, and then Italian Opera on a Journey, where they have to sing a duet, and that's why Soliwa didn't want the duo to sing at my concert. ""I'll play an instrument, which Belleville didn't want to give me at the time."" Within a week after the concert, I am not in Warsaw. The trunk for the journey has already been bought, the whole expedition is ready, the partitions are framed, the handkerchiefs are hemmed, the trousers are done. ""Just say goodbye, and that's the hardest thing."" Someone of yours will feel this poverty. My parents and children too; good children, nothing has made them so happy for a long time as your brotherly greeting, which I declared to them from your letter. – Today I will write you briefly, because I have to go to Ernemann in the morning and get voices for the choirs for Kratzer, if he wants to lend me some, because I know that he hates me. News: The mountain old man, tiego, tiego, married Panna Pągowska, but in such a way that no one in the family knew about it; – just imagine, his son was with him when he was leaving for Bielany for the wedding, and he asked him to take him for a walk (not knowing that the groom's father en qualité [2] was getting into the carriage). - His father dismissed him by giving him a ticket to the chair for Prezioza, while meanwhile he himself was fit for a deer. The next day Władzio visited him with Skarżyński Wincenty to congratulate him on his name day; it was strange to them that the father was somehow embarrassed and looked at the window every now and then, but since old Pągowski was in the same lodgings and Gorski was about to get into the carriage, the son thought that the other one was moving into the inn in his place, and it did not strike him when he met Miss Pągowska on the way out with her mother (already her stepmother) entering the room. From there, having bid farewell to his father, who dismissed him briefly and always confused, he went to Dziekoński, who had arrived in the night. Upon entering, he greets his stepfather, who begins by saying he didn't get enough sleep. - Why is that? ""And when, by the way, did your father take away all the mattresses for the wedding?"" - How is it? ""Oh well, you're coming from him."" ""So, it's not possible that he didn't tell me anything about it."" – “Ask the valet who stayed with the carriage.” - The son returned sad, having learned that he had done such a nasty thing to him. Dziekońska knows nothing about it. You know this Miss Pągowska, you saw her at Pruszakowa's - small, quite handsome; She was persecuted by the Gorski youth and the father probably married for his son. Fr. Dekert (what do you know him) was giving a wedding. Hube to Italy. Nowakowski in Białystok, smell what's going on there, because there was a place for him, I hope he won't come back. Actor Nowakowski committed to Krakow. Pity. But Dmuszewski told me that they couldn't keep him because the conditions were terrible. As the first: for the wife to play, and she can't do anything. – I am now going to old Pruszak, still ahead as to Ern[emann] – and I have a great interest in him, if it only concerns them; I can't write you about it, but the thing is separate, not milky, rather baggy. I know he will accept me well. Give me a kiss, dearest lover, I am convinced that you still love me, and I am always afraid of you as I am of some tyrant of mine - I do not know why, but I am afraid of you. God, you alone have power over me, you and... no one else. ""Maybe this is the last letter I'm writing to you."" Until your death - F. Chopin. Children, Parents, Alive. Skarżyński always asks me about you. By the way, les demoiselles du Conservatoire [3] made you bow a long time ago. Smooth. and Wołków are to stay near Soliwa for another year - and they admitted to me that they were already bored. [1] Il vous... d'honneur (French) - it brings you great honour. [2] En qualité (French) – in character. [3] Les demoiselles du Conservatoire (French) – girls from the Conservatory."
"My dearest life! Yesterday's concert went well - I hasten to report this. I tell Aspanu that I was not at all afraid, he played as I am alone, and it was fine. Full room. Goerner's Symphony began. Then my majesty's Allegro in E minor, which, as if out of a petal, was to appear on Streycher's piano. Loud applause. salt content; he conducted because of his aria with the choir, which Miss Wołków, dressed like an angel in blue, sang nicely; this aria was followed by an Adagio and a Rondo, followed by a pause between the first and second movements. - When they returned from the buffet and left the stage where they had come to give me a favorable report of the effect, the second part began with the William Tell overture. Soliwa conducted it well and made a great impression. Indeed, this time the Italian showed so much kindness to me that it is difficult to repay him - he then conducted the aria of Miss Gładkowska, white, with roses on her head, to the face beautifully dressed, who sang the cavatina from La donna del Lago with a recitative, as except for the aria in Agnieszka she has not sung anything yet. You know it: ""oh quante lagrime per te versai"" [1]. She said tutto detesto [2] down to the lower h so that Zieliński maintained that it was worth one h thousand ducats. You must know that this aria was transposed into her voice, which gained a lot from it. After accompanying Miss Gładkowska from the stage, we went to see the Potpurs on the moon that came down, etc. This time I understood each other, the orchestra understood each other, and the partner got to know each other. Only this time the last mazurka aroused a big applause, after which (ordinary face) I was called out - not once was hissed, and I had time to bow four times, but in a human way, because Brandt taught me. If only Soliwa hadn't taken my partitions home, hadn't reviewed and conducted in such a way that I couldn't fly at breakneck speed, I don't know how it was yesterday, but he always managed to keep us all together so well that, I'm telling you, never with an orchestra I haven't been able to play quietly. The piano was to be liked very much, and Miss Wołków even more; looks nice from the stage. He's going to appear in Cyrulik now, it's supposed to be on Saturday, if not Thursday. – And I don't think about anything anymore, only about packing, either on Saturday or on Wednesday I'm leaving through Krakow. Yesterday I found out that maybe Wincenty will go to Krakow; I must find out better, we could go with him, if he doesn't leave too late. I saw Karol in Warsaw in those days, he was healthy, cheerful, and he sincerely inquired when you were to meet in Lublin. He expected to find letters from you when he returned home. As for Kostuś, Father told me that he was now with Seweryn and Kincel in Buda for the coronation, and therefore not yet in Paris, but he is thinking of returning to Paris, and is certainly on his way. I am ending my life, because Mr. Lasocki is waiting for me to go with him to Ernemann's in order to invite him to lessons with his daughter. Later to the porridge, now to your mouth the most attached F. Chopin. Children, Mom, Papa, everyone, Zywny, healthy hugs you. [1] Oh quante... versai (on) - how many tears I shed because of you. [2] Tutto detesto (Italian) - I hate everything."
"My dearest parents and my sisters! As comfortable as possible and with the best weather, we arrived on Saturday at 6 o'clock in the evening. We stopped at ""Zur Goldenen Gans"". We went straight to the theater where The Alpine King was being played, which is to be staged here. The ground floor was surprised by the new decorations, but we had nothing to raise them for. The artists did well. The other day Auber's The Mason and the Locksmith was played here - badly. Winter's Interrupted Sacrifice today; I'm curious how it turns out. They have poor singers; the theater is also very cheap, a place on the ground floor costs PLN 2. This time I liked Wrocław better. I returned the letter to Sowiński; I was only able to see him once; he was with us yesterday, but he did not find us. We were in the local resort, where Schnabel, the kapellmeister, asked me to be present at the rehearsal of the concert that was to be given in the evening. They give such concerts here three times a week. I found there, in small numbers, as usual, a rehearsal orchestra, a piano, and an amateur referendary named Hellwig, preparing to play the first E-flat major of Moscheles' Concerto. Before he sat down to the instrument, Schnabel, who had not heard from me for four years, asked me to try the piano. It was hard to refuse, so I sat down and played a few variations. Schnabel was overjoyed, Mr. Hellwig chickened out, others began to ask me to let myself be heard in the evening. Schnabel in particular insisted so sincerely that I dared not refuse the old man. He is Mr. Elsner's great friend; but I told him that I would do it only for him, because I had neither played for a few weeks nor thought of showing off in Wrocław. I am old that he knows all this and that he wanted to ask me yesterday when he saw me in church, but he did not dare. So I went with his son to get the sheet music and played them Romance and Rondo o from the Second Concerto. During the rehearsal, the Germans were surprised at my playing: ""Was für ein leichtes Spiel hater"" [1], they said, but nothing about the composition. Even Titus heard one say: ""I can play, but not compose."" By the way, one day at the table d'hôte, a gentleman of a very pleasant appearance was sitting opposite us. Having entered into a conversation with him, I learned that he was an acquaintance of Scholtz from Warsaw and a friend of those gentlemen to whom I have letters from him. It was a merchant named Scharff, extremely polite; he showed us around Wrocław; having consented to the fiacra himself, he drove on more beautiful walks. The next day he signed us up at the Bursa and finally got us Fremdenkarten [2] for yesterday's concert and sent us one before the rehearsal. What must have been his and those gentlemen's who got me the card, surprise when this Fremder was the main figure of the musical evening. In addition to Ronda, I also improvised for experts on The Mute of Portica. Then the overture was played at the end, followed by dancing. Schnabel wanted to treat me with supper, but I accepted nothing but broth. I naturally got to know the local Oberorganist, Mr. Köhler; today he promised to show me the organ; I also met some baron or devil named Nesse, or Neisse, disciple of Spohr, famously, as they say, playing the violin. Another local connoisseur and musician, who traveled all over Germany, named Hesse, also complimented me, but apart from Schnabel, who showed real joy, who took me under the chin and stroked me every moment, none of the Germans knew what to do. Titus had fun looking at them. As I had no established reputation yet, people were surprised and were forbidden to be surprised; they did not know whether the composition was good or whether it just seemed so to them all the time. One of the local experts approached me and praised the novelty of the form, saying that he had never heard anything in this form before, I don't know who it was, but perhaps he understood me best. Schnabel, full of the greatest politeness, even offered me a carriage, but after 9 o'clock, when they started dancing, we took it home. I'm glad I made the old man happy. A lady, to whom the director introduced me as the first pianist here after the concert, thanked me very much for the pleasant surprise and regretted that I would not be heard in public. The referendary, consoling himself, sang Figaro's aria from The Barber, but - poorly. A lot was said about Elsner yesterday and some of his Variations for orchestra with Echo were praised; I said that if they heard his coronation Mass, they would be able to tell what kind of composer he was. – Terrible Germans here, at least yesterday's company; our Mr. Scharff is an exception. Tomorrow at 2 o'clock we leave for Dresden. Kisses! Kisses! Kisses! Gentlemen: Żywny, Elsner, Matuszyński, Kolberg, Marylski, Witwicki, I send the most pleasant bows. [1] Was für... hat er (German) - what a light touch he has. [2] Fermdenkarte (German) - entry card for guests, strangers."
" barely found a moment to tell you a few words about myself. I'm coming back from a Polish dinner, that is: at which the Poles themselves were present. I left them yet, I went back to write myself, because the post office leaves at 7 o'clock, and I would like to hear the Mute of Portici again today. We did not want to leave Wroclaw very much; a closer acquaintance with those gentlemen to whom Scholtz gave me letters made this city much more pleasant for us. Here my first visit was to Miss Pechwell. She played on Friday in the local resort and made me an entrance there. That same evening, Silent was played at the theater; it was difficult to choose, but as it was necessary for the lady to be pampered, I went for the evening. The second important reason that led me there was the news that the best local singer, an Italian by birth, named Palazzesi, could be heard on it. So, dressed as best as I could, I sent for a litter, got into this strange box, and had it carried to Kreissig's house, where this musical evening was to take place. Along the way I laughed at myself as those Liberian litters carried me; I had a great desire to break the bottom, but I gave up. This carriage carried me all the way to the stairs. I got out, told Miss Pechwell to check in; so the host came out with bows, great courtesies, and lots of compliments, and led me into a room where, on either side of eight huge tables, I saw a multitude of ladies seated. Not so much the diamonds that adorned them as the wires in my eyes twinkling. Without joking, the number of ladies and knitting needles was so great that one could fear some uprising against men, which would probably have to be fought with spectacles and bald heads; for a lot of glasses, and more and more bare skin. The clatter of these wires, as well as of the tea cups, was suddenly interrupted by music coming from the other end of the living room. First, the overture from Fra Diavolo was played, then the Italian woman sang – not bad. I got into a conversation with her; I also met her accompanist, Mr. Rastrelli, second director of the local opera house, and Mr. Rubini, brother of that famous singer, with whom I hope to meet in Milan. – A polite Italian promised me a letter to my brother; no more needed. He was so kind that yesterday he took me to a rehearsal of Vespers, a composition by Morlacche, the local court bandmaster. I reminded him on this occasion; he sat me down immediately beside him and talked to me a lot. These vespers were sung today by the famous Neapolitan sopranos named Sassarolli and Tarquinio; the violin obligato [1] was played by Rolla, a famous local concertmeister, to whom I had a card from Soliwa. – I met him, he promised me a letter to his father, director of the Milan Opera. But let's go back to the evening. Miss Pechwell was playing the piano, and I, after talking to some people, went to the Mute. I can't judge it because I haven't heard it all. I won't be able to say anything definite about it until tonight. On my way to Klengel's in the morning, I met him in front of the house; he recognized me at once, and was so kind as to touch my heart. I respect him very much. He asked (having, however, first inquired about my apartment) that I should visit him tomorrow morning. He encouraged public speaking, but I was deaf to it. I have no time to waste, and Dresden will give me neither fame nor money. General Kniaziewicz, whom I saw at Mrs. Pruszakowa's, also spoke about the concert, but announced that it would not bring much. Yesterday I was at the Italian opera, but badly performed; if it wasn't for Roila's solo and Miss Hähnel's singing from the Viennese theatre, who made her debut yesterday as Tancredi, there would be nothing to hear. The king, surrounded by the whole court, was in the theater as well as today at the great mass in the church. The Mass of Baron Miltitz, one of the local lords, was being played, conducted by Morlacche. I liked the voices of Sassarolla, Muschetti, Mabwig and Zezi best. The composition itself is poor. Dotzauer and Kummer, famous local cellists, had a couple of soyas which they played beautifully; nothing special anyway. Aside from my Klengel, which I'll probably have to show off to tomorrow, there's nothing of note here. I like talking to him because you can learn something from him. Apart from the picture gallery, I saw nothing again in Dresden; Grünes Gewölbe enough to see once; but I visited the picture gallery again with great interest. If I lived here, I would go there every week, because there are paintings that make me think I hear music. Goodbye for today. Your Frederick. [1] Obligato (Italian) – here: in the solo part."
"In Dresden, a week passed me by without realizing it. When I left home in the morning, I didn't come back like at night. Klengel, when I got to know him better, that is: when I played him my concertos, he said that I reminded him of Field's playing, that I had a rare way of striking, that although he had heard a lot about me, he never expected me to be such a virtuoso. These were not idle compliments, for he confessed to me that he did not like to flatter or force himself to praise. So immediately, the skins left him (and I stayed with Klengel all morning until 12 o'clock), went to Morlacche and to Lüttichau, General Director of the theater, to find out whether it was possible for me to be heard during the four days that I still had to play in this city. He told me afterwards that he had done it for Dresden, not for me, and that he would be glad to make me go to a concert if the arrangement would not require too much time. The next morning he came to me and announced that he had been everywhere himself and that he did not have a single free evening until Sunday (which was Wednesday) because on Friday Fra Diavola was to be given here for the first time, and on Saturday, that is yesterday, Rossini's La Donna del Lago in Italian. I accepted Klengel as few people in my life would accept; I clearly liked him as if I had known him for thirty years. He also shows a lot of sympathy for me. He asked for a partition of my Concertos and took me to Mrs. Niesiołowska for the evening. On the same day there was a party at Mrs. Szezerbinin's, but I had so much fun at Niesiolowska's that the entire invited party had already left when Klengel escorted me to Mrs. Shcherbinin. But I had to be there for lunch the next day. I was caught everywhere like a dog. On the same day, I also visited Mrs. Dobrzycka, who, because of her birthday, asked me to visit her the next day. There I found the Saxon princesses, the daughters of the late king, that is, the king's sister and the wife of the brother of the reigning monarch. I played in their presence; I was promised letters to Italy, but I don't have all of them yet, only one sent me two at the hotel when I was leaving, the rest I expect to receive in Vienna through Mrs. Dobrzycka, because she knows how to look for me there. These letters are addressed to the Queen of the Two Sicilies in Naples and to some Duchess Ulasino from the Saxon house in Rome. I also have promises to the reigning Father of Lucca and to the Viceroy of Milan. The sending of these letters will be employed by Kraszewski, to whom I am writing today deliberately in this interest. – In Dresden, I was still at dinner with the Mosquitoes. Klengel gave me a letter to Vienna, where he himself will come later; at Mrs. Niesiołowska's he drank champagne for my success, she caressed herself and did not know where to put me, and she absolutely wanted to call me Szopski. Rolla front violinist; the rest from Vienna, where we will arrive on Tuesday at 9 am. – General Kniaziewicz liked me; Very; he told me that no pianist had ever made such a pleasant impression on him."
"Dear John. Give me your house number. You know what's happening to me. How pleased I am that I am in Vienna, that I will make so many interesting and deeply important acquaintances that I may even fall in love. ""I don't think about you. Sometimes I'll just look at a ring made of Ludwika's hair, which I like more the farther away I am from it. – I love you and I love you more today here than in Warsaw. But do they love me? Aesculapius, if you haven't written a letter to me, then let the devil take you, let the lightning strike in Radom, let the button of your hat break off! – In Prague, I gave the order to send all letters to Vienna to me, there are none here yet. ""Did the rain bother you?"" I suspect you have fallen ill. For God's sake, don't applaud, because we're made of the same clay, and you know how many times I've fallen apart. - My clay will not melt now in this rain, it's 90 feet inside. Réaumur. You can - ah! no, you can't - I think you can make a house for a cat out of my clay. – Ah, you dogcatcher! - You were in the theater! “You were lorinet-smiling to others! – you shot your eyes to the cut... If so, let the bright lightning bolts shut you, you are not worth my affection. – Tytus knows and is pleased, because he always respected and sensed something; – that I am writing to you, I am doing it for myself, because you are not worth it. “Miss Heinefetter in Othello yesterday was pretty and sang beautifully. Then I will write everything to you, but let me know the number. Give me a kiss, give my friend Alfons a hug from me, I wrote to Marcel. All colleagues. Kiss, kiss. F. Chopin. The pen is like a wooden spoon and still falls out of my hand. No wonder it's so messed up. – I would write more, but I can't gather my thoughts and I'm afraid. [ On the reverse page ] To My Court Physician Jan Matuszyński, 1st Class, Saint Jacek with pirogues in his Palace, when he comes to you. By courier, Ludwika, Izabela or Zuzia. [ Addition ] It is said not to be interesting women. – I send a package of kisses from the best dozen to my good friends. - Please keep the coat of arms intact."
"The little heart laughed at the letter received for the first time in four weeks, that is, since I said goodbye to you. Lunch was better. The ""Wild Man"" (for that is the name of the excellent inn where we eat) took from me for appetizing consumption of strudels a whole Rhine and several kreutzers. The rejoicing was general, for Titus also had letters from his own. I thank Celiński for the attached note; he carried me into your bosom. I imagined myself sitting at the piano; Celiński stands in front of me and looks at Mr Żywny, who is helping Linowski with snuff. Only Matuszyński was missing from the set; I think he still has the fever... But enough romance; this cannicula will come upon me, because there are many pretty German women here, but when will she come, when!... Just imagine, Miss Blahetka with her parents in Stuttgart; maybe they'll come back in the winter. I received this message from Haslinger, who received me most politely, but that is why he did not print the Sonata or the Second Variations. He will get his mole, only I will have a room with Titus. We rented three rooms on the main street, Kohlmarkt, admittedly on the third floor, but beautifully, deliciously, elegantly furnished, for a month for little money. I get 25 Rhenish. ""An English admiral-general is still in them now, but he'll be out today or tomorrow."" Admiral! and I will be an admiration, so the lodging will not lose anything, especially since the hostess, or rather the mistress of this apartment, is a baroness, a widow and pretty, quite young, who, as she told us, had been in Poland for a long time, and had already heard about me in Warsaw. She knows the Skarżyńskis, she has been to the big world; she asked Tytus if he knew a young, pretty Mrs. Rembielińska, etc. - Well, if not more, she is worth 25 Rhine, especially since she likes Poles, does not affect Austrians, she is a Prussian woman and a very sensible woman. “As soon as they move there, Graff, the piano maker, will send us an instrument at home. Würfel, as soon as he saw me, immediately began to talk about giving a concert. Sam is very weak and does not go out, only gives lessons in the apartment; he had to spit blood, which greatly weakened him. But he still talks about the concert and told me that the local newspapers wrote a lot about my Concerto in F minor, which I don't know and I wasn't curious enough to find out. I will give a concert, but when, where, how, what, I don't know anything. My swollen nose has not allowed me to present myself at the embassy or be at Mrs. Rzewuska's, where the whole world visits, and she lives next to Hussarzewski, with whom I have already visited several times with my nose and without my wife. He does not advise me, like Würfel, to play for free. Malfatti received me as his cousin, most cordially, most politely. As soon as he read my name, he embraced me and said that Mr Władysław Ostrowski had already written to him about it; that in whatever he can be of use to me, he will do everything. He added that Mrs. Tatyshchev, the ambassador, would announce me, that he would make all the necessary acquaintances for me, that even at the court, which he doubted could be done, he would try to be useful to me, for now the court of the Neapolitan king was in mourning. He also promised to introduce me to Baron Dunoi, head of the local musical verein [1]; this is supposed to be the best acquaintance. The other, perhaps also useful, I took by Klenglowski's letter with Mr. Mittag. This man sees things as I need, and it seems that he will perhaps be of most use to me out of all the musicians. Czerny, with whom I had already visited (humble as always and for everyone), asked me what ""hat fleissig studiert"" meant [2] . Again, for 8 pianos and 16 people, he translated some overture and content. Besides, I haven't seen any of the local piano players yet. – I have already been to Mrs. Weyberheim, Wolf's sister, twice, tomorrow I am invited there for the evening: un petit cercle des amateurs [3] , from where I will visit Rozalia Rzewuska, who receives and stays between 9 and 10 already informed about my arrival by Hussarzewski. There I am to meet the famous Mrs. Cibini, for whom Moscheles wrote the 4-handed Sonata. – I was at the Comptoir with Stametz the other day; I was received there with my letters as anyone who comes for money; they gave me a statement of commitment to the police to collect my residence card and - that's it. But maybe later it will be different. I also visited Mr. Geymüller the other day, because Titus had his six thousand there. Mr. Geymüller, having read my name and surname, without reading the rest, said: ""that he is very pleased to meet a Künstler like me, but that he does not wish to be heard, because there are so many good piano players here that you must have a great reputation to get something "". Finally he added: ""that he can't help me with anything, because times are hard"", etc. I had to swallow it all with my eyes wide open at him. When he had finished his tirade, I told him that I really did not know whether it was worth letting myself be heard, because I had not yet been to any of the local nobles, or to the ambassador to whom I had a recommendation from Warsaw from Prince Prince, etc. Only he he made his eyes and, saying goodbye, I apologized to him for distracting me from business. Wait h...[ycle?] Jews! I haven't been to Lachner's, the director of the orchestra, because I have no place to receive visits. From Stadt London, where it was extremely salty, we moved to Lama in Leopoldstadt, and here we are, in the meantime, until an Englishman with a moustache, a thin, haggard green-purple-yellow underpants gets out of the Baroness's. In this apartment on a large scale (expression of Tytus, who necessarily makes me some kind of conceit) one will only play and think about the concert, but not for nothing. Anyway, we'll see. Neither at Mrs. Szaszek's, nor at Mrs. Elkan's, nor at Rothschild's, nor at Mr. and Mrs. Voigt's, nor at many other people's. I'm going to the embassy today; Baron Meindorf is supposed to be there, to whom Hussarzewski told me to ask, and he will tell me when it is best to reach Tatyszczew. I haven't touched anything of the money I got from the banker the other day. I hope I can respect them. With all this, I would like to ask that at the end of this month I could have something for the road to Italy, if my concerts did nothing for me. The theater costs me the most, but I don't regret it, for Miss Heinefetter and Mr. Wild almost always sing. I've heard three brand new operas this week. Yesterday Fra Diavola was given; there is no better; before Titus Mozart, today William Tell. I do not envy Orłowski that he accompanies Lafont; perhaps the time will come when Lafont will accompany me. Is that a bit too bold? but hell, it could be. Nidecki thinks to spend the whole winter here. This whole week has already gone to my nose, to the theater and to Graff, at whom I play every day after dinner, so that my stiff fingers get out of the way a little. Yesterday I presented Graff Nidecki. Indeed, I do not know how this week flew by; We didn't even know it, and I haven't made any decisive steps to the concert yet. Quaestia? which Concerto to play: F or E? Würfel maintains that F is more beautiful than Hummel's A flat major, which Haslinger has now done. Haslinger is wise, he politely but slightly wants to dismiss me so that I give him compositions for free. Klengel was surprised that he didn't pay me anything for the Variations. Maybe he thinks that by seemingly weighing my things lightly, I will take it seriously and give them to him for free? But it's over for nothing, now bezahl [4] , beast! – Graff advises me to let myself be heard in the Landständischen Saal, where the Spirituel Concerts are held, that is, in the most beautiful and best place. But for that you need permission from Dietrichstein, which will not be difficult for me because of Malfatte. People find me fat... I'm fine. I hope in God and in Malfatti (Malfatti in parade) that it will get even better. [ Addendum to the place marked with an asterisk ] Do not read this letter to everyone, lest they think that I was boastful. [1] Verein (German) – association, association, company. [2] Hat fleissig studiert (German) – studied diligently. [3] Un petit cercle des amateurs (French) – a small group of amateurs. [4] Bezahl (German) - pay."
"My Beloved Parents and Sisters! Seven weeks have passed yesterday since I left you. Why?... It's already happened! Just yesterday, at this hour on Tuesday, when I was escorted to Wola, I was at Mr. and Mrs. Weyberheim's for a dancing evening. It was full of pretty young people, not ancient at all. They wanted me to dance, I was violently elected to the cotillion; I turned around a few times and went to myself. The lady of the house herself and her well-behaved daughters had invited many musical persons for the evening, but I did not play, for I was not in the mood for it. She introduced me to Mr. Likt, whom Ludwika knows; the good, polite, honest German considered me something great, and therefore I did not want to knock him off the deadline with my game. There, too, I met Lampi's nephew, whom Papa knows again; cute and nice boy, he paints famously. Speaking of painting, Hummel and his son visited me yesterday morning; ends my portrait, but so similar that it couldn't be better. I'm sitting on a stool in a bathrobe, my face inspired [1], I don't know from where. With a pencil, or rather with a crayon, in a quarter format, it seems to have been engraved. Very polite is that old Hummel. As he is well acquainted with Duport, once a famous dancer and now an entrepreneur at the Kärntnertor Theater, he introduced me yesterday. Mr. Duport is supposed to be stingy; he received me very nicely, because maybe he thinks that I will play for him for free, but he is wrong. There was a slight avant-propos between us [2] to make me want to play, but when, what and how, nothing about it. If he doesn't give me enough, then I'll give a concert in a large redoubt hall. Würfel healthier; last week I met with him Slavik, a famous violinist, although a young boy, at most 26 years of age. I liked it very much. When we were walking back together, he asks me if I'm going home? ""Home,"" I replied. ""Better come with me to your countrywoman, Mrs. Bayer."" It was to her that Kraszewski sent me a letter from Dresden, together with a letter to the Viceroy of Milan; I could not return this letter until now, because I did not know where I lived, and there were thousands of Bayers in Vienna. ""Okay,"" I replied to Slavik, ""I'll just come back for the letter."" “It was indeed the same lady. The husband is a Pole from Odessa, a neighbor of Chomentowski. His wife, who had supposedly heard a lot about me, asked us the next day, that is Sunday, for dinner, where Slavik, as he played, I liked him as much as no one after Paganini. He also liked my majesty, and we decided to write a duet for violin and piano together, an idea I had already had in Warsaw. A great and truly brilliant violinist. If I meet Merek, we'll only cut the Trio, and I'll meet him any day at Mechetta's. Czerny was with me yesterday at Diabelli's, who asked me for the next Monday for an evening of musicians alone. On Sunday evening at Likt's, where there will be a great musical world and an eight-handed overture, and on Saturday old church music will be performed at Hofrat Kiesewetter, the author of a work on music. You must know that I am now standing on the fourth floor. Some Englishmen, having learned from my antecessor [3] about my lovely apartment, wanted to rent one room; but having come under the pretense of seeing one, they examined all three, and they liked them so much that they immediately offered me 80 Rhenish per month, provided that I would give it to them, which made me very happy. Baroness Lachmanowicz, Uszakowa's sister-in-law, and now my young and good housekeeper, also had an apartment similar to mine on the fourth floor; I was shown one, I rented it and now I'm standing for 10 zlotys a month as if I was paying 70 zlotys. You think for sure, the poor guy is sitting in the attic. Well, not at all, because there is still a fifth floor above me and only a roof above it, and every 60 Rhenish in my pocket is in my pocket. People visit me and Mr. Hussarzewski must be so high. But an unpaid street, in the middle of the city, close to everything. Downstairs, the most beautiful walk, Artaria to the left, Mechetti and Haslinger to the right, theater behind, what more do you need? I haven't written to Mr. Elsner yet, but I was at Czerny's; the quartet has yet to come out. Malfatti chided me that, having promised to come to Mrs. Schaschek's for dinner at two o'clock, I arrived at four o'clock; this Saturday I'm going to have dinner with him again, and if I'm late Malfatti has promised me some very painful operation; I don't say which one because it's ugly. I can see Papa getting angry at my carelessness and indecency towards people; but it will all fix itself; because Malfatti likes me, which makes me very happy. Nidecki visits me every morning and plays. If I write the Concerto for 2 Pianos, we will play together in public; but first I must perform solo. Haslinger is still polite but quiet. I don't know if I should go to Italy right now or what? I am asking you to write to me about it. Mom is happy that I'm gone, but I'm dissatisfied. It happened... Hug Titus for me and ask him for God's sake to write... No! this pleasure I have when I receive a letter from you, you cannot imagine. Why does the mail take so long! After all, you don't take it against me for bothering you... I met a very good boy here, Leidenfrost, a friend of Kessler's; he visits me often, though I have only been to him once. If I'm not invited to dinner, I eat out with him. He knows all Vienna, and whenever there is a peculiarity to see, he leads me there at once. Yesterday, for example, there was a lovely walk on the Bastei, archdukes in frock coats, noblessa, in a word, all of Vienna. There I met Slavik, whom I arranged to see today in order to choose a Beethoven theme for the variations. On the one hand, I'm happy to be here, but on the other!... How good it is here in my room! Opposite the roof, and below pygmies. I am taller than them. I feel best when, having recorded myself on the wonderful Graff piano, I go to sleep with your letters in my hand. So even in my dreams I only see you. - Yesterday, the Bayers danced mazurkas. Slavik was lying on the ground like a ram, and some old German Contessa, with a big nose and a holey physiognomy, held (as it used to be) neatly with two fingers to her dress, with her head stiffly turned to the dancer so that the bones from the neck where she could, came out, a strange cylindrical belt with long and thin legs mumbled. However, he is a dignified person, serious, learned, talks a lot and has usage du monde [4] . Among the numerous Viennese parties, evenings after taverns are famous, where Strauss or Lanner (these are the local Świeszewskis) play waltzes over dinner. They get a huge applause for every waltz; and if they play quodlibet, a mixture of operas, songs and dances, the listeners are so pleased that they do not know what to do with themselves. This proves the spoiled taste of the Viennese public. I wanted to send you a Waltz of my composition, but it's late; you will always take it. I'm not sending the mazurkas either, because I haven't rewritten them yet; not for dancing. I don't want to part with you, I would still like to write. When you see Fontana, tell him I'm going to write to him. Matuszyński, if not today, will receive a huge letter at the post office tomorrow. [1] Inspired - here: inspired. [2] Avant-propos – (French) introductory conversation. [3] Antecessor - predecessor. [4] Usage du monde – (French) sociability."
"Vienna. Christmas day. Sunday morning. Last year at this time I was at the Bernardines'. Today I sit alone in my robe, I bite the ring and write. Dearest Jasiu. I was just coming back from Slavik (a famous violinist with whom I became friends; I have never heard anything like it after Paganini - he takes 96 notes of staccato for one string, etc. beyond belief), with him I got the idea, returning home, to miss the piano and cry the adagio to the Variations on Beethoven, which we write together with him, but step one to the post office, which I never leave when passing, another gave direction to feeling. The tears that were supposed to fall on the keys, your letter was wet; I was thirsty for your writing. You know why? You already know. But not only for my angel of peace, because how much I love him, if I could, I would move all the tones that only blind, furious, enraged feelings would send me, to guess at least partly those songs whose broken echoes still wander somewhere on the banks of the Danube what John's army sang. You're making me choose a poet? You know that I am the most indecisive creature in the world, and only once in my life have I been able to choose well. My God, both she and the sisters can be of service, even if they tug, and I... If it wasn't for the fact that father may now be burdened, I would return immediately. I curse the moment of departure and admit, knowing my relations, that after Titus's departure too much fell on my head. All dinners, evenings, concerts, dances, which I have up to my ears, bore me: I am so sad, dull, gloomy here. I like it, but not in such a cruel way. I can't do as I please, I have to dress up, curl my hair, dress up [1]; in the living room I pretend to be calm, and when I come back I fulminate on the piano. I must be polite with no one, I must be polite with everyone. I have people who supposedly like me, who paint me, make fun of me, cajole me, and what's the use of me when I don't have a room - unless, if I get all your letters, I'll open the sight of King Zygmunt: I'll look at the ring. Forgive me, Jasia, for complaining to you so much, but it seems to me that half of it is easier for me, that I am calmer; I have always shared feelings with you. Did you receive a card? I'm sure you don't care about my handwriting, because you're at home; but I read and read your letter endlessly. Freyer visited me several times (although I could not visit him once); he learned from Schuch that I was in Vienna. He is standing together with Rostkowski (I think that is the name of the young man sent from the government who had a trial with Roliński). He told me many interesting details of recent times, he was pleased with your letter, which I gave him to read until a certain period. This certain period saddened me greatly. Is it really a bit of a change? Haven't you been sick? I would easily assume something similar on such a sensitive creature. Didn't you think so? Maybe the scare of the 29th? For may God defend my cause. Calm down, tell me that as long as I have enough strength... that until death... that after death my ashes will still fall under your feet. But that's not enough, what you could say... I'll write. I would have written long ago, I would not have been so tired; but people! – if by chance it fell into someone else's hands, it could harm its fame, so you better be my interpreter, speak for me, et j'en conviendrai [2] . Your French words have killed me. ""The German who was walking with me across the street when I read your letter could barely hold me under his arm and could not at all measure what had happened to me."" I felt like catching and kissing everyone who passed by, and I felt like never before, because this is the first letter from you! I bore you, Jasia, with my stupid frenzy, but it's hard for me to wake up to write something indifferent to you... The other day I had dinner with a Polish lady named Bayer, named Constance. I like to go there before reminiscing; all the sheet music, handkerchiefs, napkins marked with her name; besides, Slavik and I go there together, to whom she suffers something. The other day we played all before and after dinner, and because it was Christmas Eve and a beautiful (clearly spring) time, we left the Bayers at night. Having said goodbye to Slavik, who had to go to the Imperial Chapel, alone at 12 o'clock I went slowly to St. Szczepan. I came, there were no people yet. Not for the service, but for the sake of looking at this immense edifice at this hour, I stood in the darkest corner at the foot of the Gothic pillar. It is impossible to describe the magnificence, the grandeur of these huge vaults - it was quiet - sometimes only the gait of the sacristan lighting the lamps in the depths of the temple interrupted my lethargy. There was a grave behind me, a grave below me... Only above me there was no grave. A gloomy harmony swarmed in me... I felt more than when my orphanhood; I liked to drink this great view until people and light began to arrive. Here, covering yourself with the collar of your coat, as it often does, do you remember? through Krakowskie Przedmieście, I went to music in the Imperial Chapel. Along the way, not alone, but with a lot of companies walking merry people, I ran through the more beautiful streets of Vienna up to the Castle, where, having listened to three numbers of a slow, sleepy mass played, I returned to sleep after 1 am. I dreamed about you, about you - about them, about my beloved children. The next day I was woken up with an invitation to Mrs. Elkan, a Polish banker, for dinner. I got up, played sadly, Nidecki, Leidenfrost, Steinkeller came to me, we said goodbye and I went to dinner at Malfatte's; Szaniasio, a Pole killed today, ate zrazy and cabbage like, I assure you, none among the Carmelites. I did not yield to him; you need to know that this rare man (in the full sense of the word man), doc. Malfatti, so memorable about everything that when we have dinner at his place, he searches for Polish dishes for us. After dinner came Wild, the famous, even today the first German tenor player. I accompanied him by heart with an aria from Othello, which he sang masterfully. He and Heinefetter maintain all the opera here, for the rest is so poor as to be unworthy of Vienna. Miss Heinefetter is almost out of her mind. A voice that I will never hear so soon - all sung well, every note held exactly, purity, suppleness, portamenta - but it's so cold that I barely froze my nose when I was sitting in the chairs in the first row near the stage. Pretty from the stage, especially masculine. In Othello, she is better than in The Barber, where instead of an innocent, lively, amorous girl, she presents a practiced coquette on all sides; in Mozart's Titus as Sextus pretty, in Teutonic Knight the same. He will soon perform in Sroka; curiosity takes me. Wolków Barber understood better, if only Miss Heinefetter's throat was needed. Undoubtedly, she is one of the first female singers, but not the first. – I was supposed to go and hear Pasta. You know that I have letters from the Saxon court to the Viceroy of Milan. ""But how to go?"" My parents make me do what I want, and I don't like it. to Paris? locals advise me to wait. Come back? ""Sit here?"" ""Kill yourself?"" - Not writing to you? You advise me what to do. Ask these people who govern me, and write me an opinion, and it will be so. I will stay here next month. So write before you go east north (but I hope you won't need to go out). So write before you leave ( posterestante to Vienna), before you leave, be with your parents, with Cons... Replace me for them while you're sitting. Come often, let the sisters see you, let them think that you come to me and I in the other room; sit next to them, and let them think that I am sitting in the back. Go to the theater and I'll come there. I read journals diligently: I have been promised Polish dailies. - I'm not thinking about the concert. – There is Alois Schmidt here, a pianist from Frankfurt, known for his very good Etudes, a man over 40 years old, I met him, he promised to visit me. Thoughts to play a concert, you have to give priority; I think he's a man to the point, and I hope we'll understand each other musically. Because Thalberg plays hard, but not my man, younger than me, ladies like it, he makes Mueta poppuri [!], piano with pedal, not with his hand, he gives back, he takes tenths of octaves like me, he has diamond shirt buttons, Moscheles is not surprised and therefore it is not surprising that he liked only the tutti from My Concerto. He also writes a concerto. I finish your letter 3 days later. I have read the rubbish I have told you; forgive me, Jasiu, if you have to pay for them. Today, at a dinner in an Italian restaurant, I heard: ""Der liebe Gott hat einen Fehler gemacht, dass er die Polen geschaffen hat"" [3], so don't be surprised that I can't write what I feel well. Also, do not expect news from a Pole, because the other one said: ""In Polen ist nichts zu holen"" [4] - Doggies! Meanwhile, they are indeed happy, although they do not want to show it. A French sausage-maker has come here, a lot of people have been gathering in front of his elegant shop for a month now, they always find something new for this Frenchman; some think that these are the effects of the French Revolution, and they look mercifully at the sausages hanging on the tablecloths; others are angry that a French rebel was allowed to set up a ham shop when they have enough pigs in their own country. Where are you going, we're talking about a Frenchman, and be afraid that if something were to happen, it wouldn't start with a Frenchman... I'm finishing, Jasiu, because I have to finish. Give all my dear friends a hug from me. Give me a kiss, I think I will stop loving you together with my life, with my parents, I think I will stop loving you together with her. My dear, write to me. Even show this letter if you think so, because I don't have time to read it anymore. Tonight to Malfatte for the evening, and first alone to the post office. - As soon as I find a moment, I will write to you again. My parents may know that I am writing to you; tell them but don't show the letter. I still can't tear myself away from lovely Jasia. Go, you wretch, if Watson still loves you as much as I do, he must be glad of the revolution. Didn't they hang her mother? But the moustache (you already know), moustache, crybaby that this ugly music papa doesn't ring, it's a pity. How beautiful it would be, for example, to the finale in Magpie, such a protective bell ... Const ... (I can't even write the name, my hand is unworthy). Ah! I tear my hair out when I remember that they might forget me. Gressers! Pictureless! Pisarzewski. So much! I am Othello today. I wanted to fold this letter and seal it without an envelope, but I forgot that you can read Polish. Meanwhile, when I have paper left, let me describe my life here. I am standing on the 4th floor, on the most beautiful street, but I would have to look out the window if I wanted to see what is going on downstairs. My room (you will see it in my new album when I return to your bosom), young Hummel draws it for me, it is large, neat, with 3 windows, the bed is opposite the windows, a (wonderful) pantalion on the right, and a sofa on the left page. Between the windows of the mirror, in the middle, a beautiful, large, mahogany, round table; polished floor. Quiet. After dinner, the Lord does not accept, and therefore I can completely transfer my thoughts to you. In the morning I am awakened by an unbearably stupid servant, I get up, they bring me coffee, I play and I often drink a cold breakfast. Then around 9 o'clock comes a meter of German language; later I play most often, after which, so far, Hummel drew me, and Nidecki learned my Concerto. It's all in a dressing gown until 12 o'clock, only here comes a very worthy German, Leidenfrost, a German who works in crime, and if the time is nice, we go for a walk around the city on glacis, after which I go to dinner, if I am asked anywhere, and if not, we go together to the place where all the students here eat, that is ""Zur Boemischen Köchin"". After dinner you drink black coffee in the most beautiful Kaffenhauz (it's fashionable here, even Szaniasio happens to be); then I go for a visit, and in the gray I come home, I curl my hair, I choss and for the evening. Around 10, 11, sometimes 12 (never later) I come back - I play, cry, read, watch, laugh, go to sleep, put out the candle and always dream about me. Your letter was supposed to leave on Wednesday, but it was too late, so it leaves on Saturday. kiss Elsner. I started writing cleanly, and ended up so that you may not read me. Kiss Magnus, Alfons and Reinszmidek. If it is possible, have someone to assign to your letter. My portrait that only you and I are to know, tiny; if you think that he will give you even a little pleasure, I will send you via Schuch, who may leave with Freyer around the 15th of next month, if circumstances dictate. After Vienna they talk a lot about Klopiki, they regretted Potoki and some Woliki with X-cie were talking. I have to laugh; what they do with our names is beyond imagination. Do not return the ticket unless necessary. I don't know what he wrote. You can read the 1st maybe and the last. Ch. [1] To choss (from French chausser) – to wear shoes. [2] Et j'en conviendrai - and I will agree to it. [3] Der Iiebe Gott... hat (German) – God made a mistake by creating Poles. [4] In Polen ist nichts zu holen (German) - there is nothing to look for in Poland."
" received your letter of the 22nd. Best friend in the world, you got what you wanted. I don't know what's happening to me. I love you more than life. Write to me. You are in the army! Her or in Radom? Have you been digging dikes? Our poor parents. What are my friends doing? I live with you. I would die for you, for you. Why am I so abandoned today? Are you the only ones who are supposed to be together in such a terrible moment. – Your flute will have something to moan about, but first let the pantalion moan. You say you're leaving. how will you give back? Don't upload. Carefully. My parents! Might be wrong to think. Oh my god, that's honesty. Give me a kiss. I may go to Paris in a month, if it's quiet there. Love me always like today. Freyer loves you; I also regret not being with you. I'm going to lunch [at] Malfatti's. I'm at Steinkeller tomorrow. There is no shortage of entertainment, but the desire to have fun - I haven't had fun in Vienna yet. Today is the New Year, how sad to start it! Maybe I won't finish it. squeeze me. You are going to war. Return as a colonel. May you succeed. Why can't I at least drum! Ch."
"Version 1. Dearest Being! You got something he wanted. Did you receive the letter? Did you give it back?... I regret what I did today. I threw a ray of hope where I see only darkness and despair. Maybe she will sneer, maybe she will make a joke!... Maybe... Such thoughts come to my mind when your old colleagues: Rostkowski, Schuch, Freyer, Kijewski, Huba, etc., are talking merrily in my room. And I laugh, I laugh and in my soul, just as I write this, I have a terrible premonition. It seems to me that it is a dream, that it is intoxication that I am with you, and I dream what I hear. These voices, to which my soul is not accustomed, make no other impression on me than the rattling of carriages in the street, or any other indifferent noise. Your voice or that of Titus would wake me from this dead state of numbness. To live, to die - today it seems all the same to me. I don't have a letter from you. Tell my parents that I'm happy, that I don't lack anything, that I have fun, that I'm never alone. Tell her the same if she sneers. If not, tell her to rest assured that I am bored everywhere. I'm weak, I don't write this to my parents. Everyone asks me what's wrong with me? I have no humor; Hube takes care of me. I have a cold. Besides, you know best what's wrong with me! Our poor parents! What are my friends doing? Why am I so abandoned today, or are you the only ones to be together in such a terrible moment. Your flute will have something to moan about, but let the piano wail first. I may go to Paris in a month, if it's quiet there. There is no shortage of amusements here, but I have not yet felt the desire to amuse myself in Vienna. Merk, the first cellist here, promised me his cello visit. – Today is the New Year; how sad I start it. Hug me, I love you more than life - write as much as possible. Her or in Radom? You were digging... You write that you are going out into the field with your regiment, so how will you return the note? Do not upload - be careful... maybe parents... maybe it would be wrong! Give me one more hug... You're going to war, come back as a colonel. Let you... Why can't I be with you, why can't I be a drummer!!! Forgive me for the mess in this letter, but I'm writing like a drunk. Your Frederick. Version 2. Dearest Being! You got something he wanted. Did you receive the letter? did you give it back? I regret what I did today. I threw a ray of hope where I see only darkness and despair. Maybe she sneers, maybe she jokes. Maybe!... Such thoughts come to me when your old colleagues: Rostkowski, Schuch, Freyer, Kiijewski, Huba, etc., are talking merrily in my room - I laugh; I laugh, and in my soul, just as I write this, I have a terrible premonition. It seems to me that it is a dream, that it is intoxication, that I am with you, and I dream that what I hear, these voices, to which my soul is not accustomed, make no other impression on me, only such as the rattling of carriages on street or other indifferent noise; Your voice or that of Titus would awaken me from this dead state and indifference. To live, to die, it seems all the same to me today, I have no letter from you! Tell my parents that I'm happy, that I don't lack anything, that I have fun, I'm never alone. Tell her the same if she sneers. ""If not, tell her to be calm, I get bored everywhere."" I'm weak, I don't write this to my parents. Everyone asks me what's wrong with me. I have no humor. Hube takes care of me. I have a cold. And you know what's wrong with me. Wild perfect singer, not Polkowski. I know him closely. Paradny Slavik, we often play together; tomorrow for lunch together. Left, the local first French horn player, we also play, he comes to my place. Now Merk has promised me his cello visit. I cannot send you any songs. Hug your friends. Kiss Magnus, Alfonso (Brandt). Reinszmidka, Domusia, Wilusia. I am writing to Marcel. Write to me, Jasio! When we talk. I love you and you love me. I write like a drunk. Address: I believe Jaś, I don't even seal it. Kids! To all my friends, your sister and father."
"Dear Mr. Elsner! I am ashamed that the goodness of the Lord, of which I received so much evidence on my departure, also this time forestalled my duty: it was for me to write to you immediately after my arrival in Vienna. But I lingered, partly because I was convinced that my parents would not fail to give you uninteresting news about me, and partly because I was waiting to report something definite about myself. But from the day on which I learned of the events of November 29, until now, I have experienced nothing but disturbing fear and longing; and Malfatti tries in vain to convince me that every artist is cosmopolitan. Even if it were so, as an artist I am still in my cradle, and as a Pole I have started my third cross; I hope, therefore, that knowing me, you will not take it against me that the former feelings prevail; I hadn't thought about the arrangement of the concert until now. For, by all means, I am now hindered by incomparably greater difficulties. – Not only that the uninterrupted series of vile piano concerts, by spoiling this kind of music, repels the local audience, but also everything that happened in Warsaw changed my position to the disadvantage to the extent that it could contribute to my good in Paris. Nevertheless, I hope that everything will be okay and I will be able to hear my 1st Concert, Würfel's favorite, during the carnival. Good Würfel always weak, I see him often; always happy to mention you. – If it wasn't for the interesting acquaintances of local first talents, such as Slavika, Merk, Boklet, etc., I would not have much to use. The opera is good indeed; Wild and Heinefetter occupy the audience here; it is only a pity that Duport exhibits few new things, and more for his pocket than for the opera. Abbé Stadler regrets this and says that Vienna today is not what it used to be. He prints his Psalms with Mechette, a work which he saw and admired in manuscript. As for your Quartet, Józef Czerny solemnly promised me that he would be ready for the ninth. – He said that he had not been able to employ him so far because he was publishing Schubert's works, many of which are still waiting for the press; this will probably delay the release of your second manuscript. However, as far as I have been able to judge so far, Czerny is not one of the rich local editors, and therefore he cannot boldly spend on such works that Sperl or Zum Römischen Kaiser cannot play. They call waltzes here works! and Strauss and Lanner, who play music for them, are Kapellmeisters. It does not mean, however, that everyone here thinks so; and yes, almost everyone laughs at it, but still the waltzes only print. Mechetti, it seems to me, is more entreprenant [1], and it will be easy to talk about your masses with him, because he intends to publish the scores of major church works. His accountant is polite and enlightened Sas; I mentioned to him about the wonderful masses of the Lord and he was not at all for this, and he rules everything in commerce. I'm having lunch with Mechetti today, I'm going to talk seriously and write to you soon. Haslinger now publishes Hummel's last mass. He only lives by Hummel; but the last things, for which he had to pay dearly, have little interest. Therefore, he delays all manuscripts and prints only Strauss. Just as today every barrel organ can play Strauss, maybe in a few months it will play Nidecki; only in a different sense. I was with him yesterday at Steinkeller's, who gave him an opera to write. He counts a lot on it: Schuster, the famous comedian, will perform in it, and Nidecki can make a name for himself. I hope this will please you. He took the rescript from the commission, but not the money. You write to me about my 2nd Concerto, which Nidecki learned, it was of his own free will. Knowing that before leaving Vienna he would have to make himself known in public, he was to give a concert - and not having his own, only nice variations, he asked for my manuscript. But all this has already been prevented, and he will perform not as a virtuoso, but as a composer. I will probably let you know about it. I will try to have his overture played at my concert. You will have comfort from us! (If it's not a shame, because here Aloys Schmidt, a pianist from Frankfurt, got hit on the nose a lot, even though he is over 40 years old and composes 80-year-old music). I join in due respect for the whole house, please accept the assurance of admiration with which I remain forever your grateful and devoted student of FF. Chopin. Kudos to friends and colleagues. [1] Entreprenant (French) – enterprising."
"Already newspapers and posters announced my concert to be given in two days, and as if it never was, I care so little. I do not hear [correction: ucham] compliments that are getting more and more stupid [correction: y zam. e] seem - [a few words crossed out] - I want to die - and I would like to see my parents again. The image of her in front of my eyes [correction: ami] - it seems to me that I do not love her, and yet it does not come out of my head. Everything I have seen abroad so far seems to me old and unbearable, and only makes me sigh home, to those blessed hours which I did not know how to appreciate. What once seemed great to me, today ordinary, and what used to be ordinary, today dissimilar - extraordinary - too great - too high. - Here people are not mine, good people, but [crossed out: not inherently good] good by habit, they do everything too neatly - [two words crossed out] - flatly - mediocrely [crossed out: And that's what] kills me. ""I don't even want to feel mediocrity."" n- [?] \r\n"
"I'm strange, I'm sad - I don't know what to do - why me alone! Today it was beautiful in the Prater - lots of people I didn't care for at all, I loved the greenery, the smell of spring - this innocence in nature reminded me of my childish feelings. A storm was gathering, I came back, there was no storm, only sadness overtook me - why? Neither does music make me happy today - it's late at night and I don't want to sleep; I don't know what I'm missing - and I've already started the 3rd cross. \r\n"
"My Beloved Parents and Sisters! This week I had to follow a strict list diet. I explained to myself that I'll get one next time, and I'm waiting calmly, because I expect you to be healthy, both in the country and in the city. As for me, I am in good health, and I feel that in misfortune it is a great sweetness. ""If it weren't for my unexpectedly good health, I don't know what I'd be doing here."" Maybe it was Malfatt's soups that poured some balm into my veins, destroying any desire for illness? If so, I regret that our periodic feasts ended last Saturday: for Malfatti had gone to the country with the children. “You won't believe how nice a place he lives; this week I was with him with Hummel. Showing us around his seat, he gradually showed its beauty, and when we got to the very top of the mountain, we didn't want to come down. The court honors him with a visit every year, and is next door to the Duchess of Anhalt, who probably envies his garden. On the one hand, you can see Vienna underfoot, so that it seems to be united with Schönbrunn; on the other, high mountains, and the villages and monasteries scattered on them make you forget about the splendor and bustle of the bustling city. I was also with Kandler yesterday in the imperial library. You must know that I have long intended to visit perhaps the richest collection of old musical manuscripts here, but it never came to that. I do not know whether the Bonnon library is maintained in a greater and more systematic order; but imagine my surprise when among the newer manuscripts I see a book in a case with the inscription Chopin. Something quite thick and in a nice frame. I think to myself, I've never heard of another Chopin. There was one Champin - so I thought maybe it was his name misspelled or something. I take out, I look, my hand: and Haslinger gave the manuscripts of my Variations to the Library. I think to myself, ""D[urnies], you have something to hide."" There was supposed to be a big firework last Sunday, but it didn't happen because of the rain. The special thing is that there must be bad weather almost always on fireworks day. I will give you an anecdote in this regard: A certain gentleman had a beautiful brown tailcoat, but he put it on many times, so many times it rained. Although he rarely wore it, he almost never went home in a dry tailcoat. So he goes to the tailor, tells him about it, and asks what could be the cause of it? The tailor was surprised, and began to shake his head; but he asks the gentleman to leave the tailcoat for a few days to try it out, because he could not vouch for it, that is, this fatalism is sometimes not attached to a hat, shoes or waistcoat. But where there; the tailor put on his tailcoat, went out into the street, and it was raining like pouring rain - the poor fellow must have hired a fiacra to go home, because he had forgotten to take an umbrella with him, or (more like the truth, as many say) that the seamstress went out with an umbrella to your cousin or friend. In whatever way it happened, the tailor got wet and the tailcoat was damp; you had to wait for it to dry, otherwise it wouldn't be dry. After waiting, the tailor comes to his senses to rip open the tailcoat and see if there isn't some caduc there that would bring clouds. Great thought! He rips his sleeves - there's nothing. He's ripping the tails - there's nothing. She rips her breasts - and what? Here is a piece of firework poster among the glue! He understood everything; took out the poster, and from then on the tailcoat was no longer wet! Forgive me that I have nothing comforting to say about myself; maybe later I will console you again; I desire nothing more than to answer your wishes; I couldn't until now."
Reverend Good Lord! Professor WA Maciejowski kindly imposed on me the obligation to remind JWMr Dobr. about the little package he was supposed to pick up at the hands of Mr. Romuald Hube. Since Mr. Romuald has already arrived at home, I am begging the grace of Mr. Dobr. to deign to send this packet either directly to Mr. Maciejowski, or to me in Vienna, Kohlmark[t] No. 1151, 3 Stock, send back, nb. before the first month of June, if it is possible, because that is the limit until which I intend to stay in Vienna. As soon as I receive it, I will not fail to immediately send to the eagerly awaiting professor the materials for the work he has undertaken. Forgive Lord Good, if I trouble him with my writing, but I was happy to seize the opportunity to assure Lord Good. of the high esteem with which I become a true and humble servant of FF. Chopin.
" come back from the post office, but nothing came. On Wednesday I received a letter from Mrs. Jarocka with a note from my beloved Papeczka, who, however, scarcely wrote letters so dear to me. However, I can see that it is healthy at home. As for Marceli and Jaś, I beseech them to write to me, when they are so wicked that I cannot ask them for a few letters! I am so angry that I would send them back without even opening their letters. They will explain to me the lack of time, and I have time to write such large letters to you every week? Oh, the time it flies! – it's the end of May, and I'm still in Vienna; June will begin, and I will still be sitting here, because Kumelski has relapsed and the poor thing is lying again. I see that I am a dull letter, but don't think that it is due to some morbid disposition, yes, I am well and am enjoying myself. I got up this morning and played until two o'clock, and then went out to dinner, where I found good Kandler, who, as you know, promised me letters to Cherubini and Paër. - After visiting the patient, I intend to go to the theater, because there will be a concert there, and during it you will hear: Herz, the Jew, the violinist, who was almost whistled at Miss Sonntag's concert in Warsaw, and Döhler, the piano player playing Czerny's compositions. At the end of the concert, Herz is to play his own Variations on Polish Motifs. Poor Polish theme! you don't expect what majufes they will fill you with, calling it Polish music to lure the audience. Defend this Polish music here, give your opinion about it, and they will take you for a madman, the more so that Czerny, that Viennese oracle in the fabrication of all musical delicacies, has never gone crazy on any Polish theme. Yesterday after lunch, Thalberg and I went to an Evangelical church where Hesse, a young organist from Breslau, was showing off to a select Viennese audience; there were all cymes, from Stadler, Kiesewetter, Mosel, Seyfried, Gyrowetz, etc., to the church porter. He's got talent, man, he knows how to handle organs. Hesse left me a piece of paper for his album, but I don't know what to write in it - I'm at a loss for ideas. – On Wednesday at the Bayers I stayed with Slavik until 2 o'clock in the afternoon. He is one of the artists here that I take comfort from and with whom I have an intimacy. He was playing like a second Paganini at the time, but Paganini rejuvenated, which would exaggerate the time of the first. I wouldn't have believed it if I hadn't listened to it often; I just wish, oh wish Titus didn't recognize him. And he stupefies the listener, makes people weep; what's more, it makes tigers cry! because prince G. and Iskr. moved away. What's going on with you too?!... You're dreaming and you're dreaming! Will there be an end to the bloodshed? I know what you want to tell me: ""Be patient!"" I take comfort in that too. On Thursday there was an evening at Fuchs, where Limmer, one of the better artists here, showed off his compositions for 4 cellos. Merk, by his custom, made them more graceful than they really are. We stayed up until 12:00 because Merek wanted to play his Variations with me. Merk tells me he likes to play with me and I like him too, so we have to seem good together. He is the first cellist I love up close; I don't know how I'll like Norblin; just don't forget the letter to him."
" am in good health, and this is one thing that comforts me, because my departure is not strangely prepared. I haven't experienced anything like it yet. You know how indecisive I am, and there are obstacles at every turn. I am promised a passport every day, and every day I walk from Annas to Caifas to collect what I have left in the police depository. Today I learned a new thing - that my passport has been so misplaced that not only will it not be found, but I must submit a request for a new one. Strange railways befall us all today; although I'm ready to leave, I can't. I took Bayer's advice, I'm having my passport signed for England, but I'm going to Paris. Malfatti gives me a letter to his good friend Paër. Kandler had already written about me for a musical Leipzig newspaper. Yesterday I came home at 12 o'clock because it was St. Jan, so Malfatti's name day. Mechetti surprised him, so Wild, Cicimara, Miss Emmering, Lutzer, and my dignity made him some great music. I have not yet heard a better performed quartet from Moses; but Oh quante lagrime Miss Gładkowska sang much better at my farewell concert in Warsaw. Wild was by the voice; I held the office of a Kapellmeister. [Addendum] Cicimara said that there is no one in Vienna who would accompany me like me. I thought to myself: I know this very well. (Quiet!) A huge crowd of foreign listeners were listening on the terrace to this concert. - The moon was shining beautifully, the fountains were beating, a wonderful fragrance from the open-air conservatory filled the atmosphere, in a word: the most delicious night, the most delightful place. You can't imagine what a pretty building the drawing-room where the singing was; huge windows, open from the bottom up, open onto a terrace from which the whole of Vienna can be seen; full of mirrors and little light. The office of the oblong vestibule adjoining to the left gave a certain vast expanse to the whole apartment. The host's sincerity and courtesy, elegance, good living, cheerful company, wit prevailing there, and an excellent supper kept us for a very long time, until about midnight we got into the carriages and drove home. I keep my expenses as well as I can, I hide every kreuzer like that ring in Warsaw. You can sell it if you like; I already cost you enough, to my misfortune. One day, with Kumelski and Czapek, who is my daily guest and shows me the greatest signs of friendship, to the point that he offered to give money for the road if I needed it, we were at Leopoldsberg and Kahlenberg. The day was wonderful. I have never had a more beautiful walk. From the Leopoldsberg you can see all of Vienna, Wagram, Aspern, Presburg, the Neuburg Monastery, the castle where Richard the Lionheart was imprisoned - and the entire upper part of the Danube. After breakfast we went to Kahlenberg, where King Sobieski had a camp (I am sending a letter to Izabela from there). – There is a church there, formerly of the Camaldolese, where his son Jakub, before attacking the Turks, knighted himself to the Holy Mass. served. From there, towards the evening, we went to Krapfenwald, a very pleasant valley, where we saw a strange street urchin's custom. The guys dress up in leaves from head to toe and in such a costume, like walking and dancing bushes, they go from one guest to another. Such a drum, all covered in leaves, with branches on its head, is called a Pfingstkönig. It's supposed to be a Pentecost celebration. Original nonsense! Also, a few days ago I was at Fuchs's for the evening; showed me his collection of 400 autographs, among which my Rondo for 2 pianos, bound, sits. There were a few people there to get to know me. Fuchs gave me a sheet of Beethoven's handwriting. Your last letter made me very happy, because they are all the dearest on one piece of paper. So I kiss his feet and hands for him, which are not found here in all of Vienna."
My dear child. I have just received a letter which Mr. Scholtz has been kind enough to deliver to me personally. I am very glad that your health will not be an obstacle to your departure, and I wish with all my heart that heaven will keep it for you. Since I gather from your letters that you have already touched the money intended for the onward journey, I am sending you a small allowance, according to our ability rather than our willingness. You mention that you took 450 Rhenish zlotys from Mr. Stein, which is 1800 Polish zlotys. I add PLN 1,200 to this, which will amount to PLN 3,000 in total. Thus, you will receive three hundred Rhine zlotys at no cost, as I have paid the entire sum in silver rubles, and even PLN 223 Polish zlotys to cover bank costs, according to the calculations of Mr. Scholtz, who assured me that it is difficult to send money abroad. So, my dear child, since your resources are not great, try not to stay long in Munich, lest you spend there what little you have at your disposal. I'm counting on your foresight. Tell us as soon as possible whether you will be able to visit Roman and whether you have friends where you are now. I am very happy that Mr. Kumelski is making this journey with you, at least you are not so lonely. Save as much as you can, my heart bleeds that I can't do more for you. I hug you with all my heart. Ch.
"Dear Mr Frederick. Let me remember your memory and thank you for the beautiful songs. Not only I, but all who know them, have enjoyed them immensely; and you would admit that they are very beautiful if you heard your sister sing them. You absolutely must be the creator of Polish opera; I have the deepest conviction that you will be able to become one and that as a Polish national composer you will open up an immensely rich field for your talent, where you will earn uncommon fame. If only you would keep in mind: nationality, nationality and more nationality; it is almost an empty word for common writers, but not for a talent like yours. There is a native melody like a native climate. Mountains, forests, waters and meadows have their own family, inner voice, although not every soul understands it. I am convinced that the Slavic opera, brought to life by true talent, by a composer who feels and thinks, will one day shine in the musical world like a new sun, maybe even rise above all others, it will be as melodious as Italian, and even more tender and much more thoughts. Whenever I think about it, my dear Fryderyk, I always rejoice in the sweet hope that you will be the first who can draw from the vast treasures of Slavic melody; if you had not followed this path, you would have voluntarily renounced the most beautiful laurels. Leave imitations to others, let mediocrity play with them. You be original, native; maybe not everyone will understand you at first, but perseverance and formation in the chosen field will ensure you a name among posterity. Whoever wants to exalt himself in any art, to become a true craftsman, should have great goals in front of him. I am sorry to write you this; believe me that these advices and wishes come from sincere favor and from the respect I have for your talent. If you go to Italy, it would be good for you to spend some time in Dalmatia and Illyria to learn the songs of our brother people, as well as in Moravia and Bohemia. Search for Slavic national melodies, like a minerologist of stones and ores in the mountains and fields. You may even find it appropriate to note down some of the chants; it would be an extremely useful collection for you yourself, you don't have to waste time on it. I apologize again for my uninvited scribbling and I will stop on this matter. Your parents and sisters are in the best of health; I enjoy seeing them from time to time. We all live here like a fever. I was so unhappy with my health that until now I could not go into the field. While others with crutches, I played with pills; but I am in the artillery of the National Guard. I heard you're bored out there and you're getting sick of it. I am entering your position: no Pole now can be calm when it comes to the death or life of his homeland. However, I wish you to remember for the future, my dear friend, that you left not to miss, but to develop yourself in your art and become the comfort and glory of your family and country. I dare to give you this advice with the permission of your honorable mother. In fact, in order to work profitably, one must have a free mind, not yearning and not caring. I bid you farewell, my dear Fryderyk, wishing you health and all the best. Your friend Witwicki. If you want to put music to any other song by taking two stanzas together, as in The Envoy, don't consider the stanzas to be odd, because I can make one more. Adieu."
" see from your last letter that you have come to terms with your misfortune; believe that nothing can touch me anymore. Hope, dear hope! I finally have a passport. However, there will be nothing from Monday's ride, only on Wednesday we will go to Salzburg, and from there to Munich. You should know that I have had my passport visad for London. The police did, but the Russian embassy held him for two days, and he was given to me with permission to go not to London but to Munich. Never mind, I thought, as long as Mr. Maison, the French ambassador, would sign. – In addition to the above problems, we have another one: when leaving for Bavaria, you need to have a Gesundheitspass [1] for cholera, otherwise they won't let you enter the Bavarian state. We've been chasing this with Kumelski for half a day; it will be over after lunch. I am glad that after so many dicasterial [2] stairs we had at least a good company, because if we judge by the Polish face, good speech and passport, it was Aleksander Fredro with us for his servants who followed a similar streak. The cholerae are so scared here, it's laughable. They sell printed cholera prayers, they don't eat fruit, and most of them flee the city. I will leave the Polonaise for cello to Mechetti. Ludwika writes to me that Mr. Elsner was satisfied with the review; I don't know what he'll say on the other hand, because he taught me composition. I lack nothing, only life, more spirit; I'm tired, but sometimes as happy as at home. When I have sad moments, I go to Mrs. Szaszek; there I usually find a few good-natured Polish women, whose sincere and hopeful words always delight me so much that I immediately begin to pretend to be local generals. New is polychinel, freshly made by me; you haven't seen it yet, but those who look at it are bursting with laughter. There are days when you won't get two words out of me or get along, and then I go for 30 kreutzers to Hietzing or somewhere around Vienna to have fun. Zacharkiewicz from Warsaw visited me; she, when she saw me at the Szaszko's, could not marvel that I had become such a stout man. I put my favorites on the right side and – there is a lot of it. There is no need for the left one, because only the right one is used to sit in front of the audience. The other day, the good Würflisko visited me, Czapek, Kumelski and many others also came and we went to St. Veit. - It's a nice place, but I won't say that about the so-called Tivoli here, where there is a kind of carousel, or a slide on carts, as they call it - Rutsch. This is huge nonsense. Many people, however, are driven down in these carts from above without any purpose; did not want to look at it. Only later, since there were eight of us (and all good friends), when we started to go racing together, who will fly faster, helping each other with their legs, it took on the purpose of competing, and from the fiery of this stupid Viennese game of a malcontent I became a zealous proselyte, until the mind again it never occurred to me that this is what amuses healthy and strong bodies, and so deceives capable minds, and that just when all mankind calls upon such people to defend itself. Let the devil take them!... Rossini's The Siege of Corinth was shown here at the theater - very good. I'm glad to see this opera. Wild, Heinefetter, Binder, Forti, in a word, what only Vienna has good, performed very well. I went to this opera with Czapek once, and then to dinner, where Beethoven always drank. But lest I forget, I'll probably have to take some more money from Peter the banker, as Papa has allotted me, I'm doing my best, but God damn it, I can't otherwise, or I'd be on my way with a very light sack. Later, God forbid sickness or what you could reproach me for, why it didn't take more. Forgive me, after all, I already live here in May, June and July on this money and I pay more dinners than in winter. I do this not only from my own inspiration, but rather from the admonitions of others. I'm sorry to have to ask you this today. Papeczka no longer spent three pennies on me; I know how hard it is to struggle with a penny, that today even torments will not help, but hope! It's hard for me to ask how to give you, but it's easier for me to take how to give you back. God will have mercy - punctum! In October the year will be over when I have been granted a passport; it will probably have to be extended; how do i do it? Write if you can - and how - send me a new one. Maybe you can't!... I often run after some Jaś or Tytus on the street. Yesterday I would have sworn it was Titus in the back, and he's some damn Prussian. Don't let all these epithets give you the wrong idea of my Viennese education; although here they have neither so much politeness nor choice words in conversation, except Gehorsamer Diener [3] at the end; but I don't learn anything here that is Viennese by nature. For example, I can't dance a waltz properly, that's enough! My piano could not hear, only mazurkas... God, give you health! May none of my friends die. It's a pity Gucia!... Your letters sting and put a huge seal of health, they are so afraid: panic fear! Your most affectionate Frederick. [1] Gesundheitspass (German) – health certificate. [2] Dicastery - here: official. [3] Gehorsamer Diener (German) – humble servant."
" Abstract ] \r\n ""Fryderyk informs his parents that he is on board, going with Kumelski through Linz and Salzburg to Munich. So he writes that he is in good health and that Steinkeller has provided him with money; but fearing that they would not suffice for him, he asks for new ones to be sent to Munich.” \r\n"
"Stuttgart. Strange thing! This bed to which I am going may have served many a dying man, and I am not disgusted by it today! Perhaps more than one corpse lay and lay on it for a long time? ""And what corpse is worse than me?"" - The corpse also knows nothing about father, mother, sisters, Titus! ""The corpse doesn't have a lover either!"" ""He can't talk to those around him in his language!"" ""A corpse as pale as I am."" A corpse so cold as I feel cold to everything now. “The corpse is no longer alive—and I have lived to my fill. - To sit? ""And is the corpse full of life?"" – If he was full, he would look good, and he was so wretched – could life have so much influence on the features, on the facial expression, on the human exterior? Why do we live such a wretched life that devours us and serves us to make corpses! “The clocks in the Studgard towers strike the hour at night. Ah, how many corpses have been made in the world at this moment! Mothers to children, children to mothers lost - how many plans destroyed, how much sadness from the corpses at this moment and how much consolation. How many dishonest guardians, how many oppressed beings with corpses. Bad and good corpse! “Virtue and crime one! – Sisters [word deleted] when corpses. So it can be seen that death is the best deed of man - and what will be the worst? – Christmas! as contrary to the best deed. So I have reason to be angry that I came into the world! – why was I not allowed to remain inactive in the world [word deleted]? ""After all, I'm inactive anyway!"" ""What's the use of my existence?"" ""I can't trust people, because I don't have calves or mouths!"" ""And if I had that, I wouldn't have anything else!"" - What would be with calves - when there can be no calves! ""Does the corpse have calves?"" “The corpse also has no calves, like me; and here's one more similarity. So I'm close to being mathematically close to death. I don't want her today, unless you're sick, kids. That you, too, wish for nothing better than death! - If not, I want to see you again - not for my direct, but for [deleted: your] indirect happiness, because I know how much you love me. She was just pretending. Or pretending. Oh, that's a guess! ""Yes, no, yes, no, no, no, yes, finger to finger... it's gone!... Does she love me?"" He loves me for sure? ""Let him do what he wants."" Today, a higher feeling, higher, far higher than... curiosity in my soul. [Two lines crossed out.] You can have a good memory - [Line crossed out.] Father, Mother, children. All that is dearest to me, where are you? - Corpses maybe? – Maybe the Muscovite played a trick on me! – Oh, wait! ""Wait... But tears?"" ""They haven't flown for a long time?"" – Why is that? - After all, a dry sadness has long seized me. Ah, I couldn't cry for long. How good I am... I miss you! Missing and good! ""How does it feel?"" Good and longing, when longing is not good, but nice! – It is a strange state. But so is the body. Good and bad together at the same time. He moves into a happier life and he's fine, he regrets leaving the past and misses it. It must be for the corpse as it was for me when I finished crying. It was, apparently, a momentary death of my feelings - I died to my heart for a moment! Or rather, my heart died for a moment. ""Why not forever?"" ""Maybe I'd be better off."" – Alone, alone – [Three lines crossed out.] Ah, my poverty is indescribable. She can barely bear it. The heart is barely bursting with joy and with the great pleasures experienced during this year. My passport expires next month - I can't live abroad, or at least officially I can't. I'll be all the more like the Corpse. – * Studgard. I wrote the previous pages knowing nothing - that the enemy at home - [One line deleted.] Suburbs destroyed - burned - Hansel! - Wiluś must have died on the ramparts - I see Marcel in captivity - Sowiński, that good fellow, in the hands of these scoundrels! ""Oh God, there you are!"" ""You are and you don't take revenge!"" ""Aren't you tired of Moscow's crimes - or - or are you a Muscovite yourself!"" ""My poor Father!"" ""My good fellow, perhaps hungry, has nothing to buy mother's bread with!"" ""Perhaps my sisters have succumbed to the fury of Muscovite villainy!"" Paszkiewicz, one dog from Mohilew, is taking over the seat of the first monarchs of Europe?! Muscovites the master of the world? [Two words crossed out.] - O Father, such are the pleasures of your old age! – Mother, suffering, tender mother, you outlived your daughter to wait for a Muscovite to come over her bones to oppress [you - deleted.] you. Ah, Powązki! Did they respect her grave? Trampled - a thousand other corpses piled up the grave. They burned the city!! ""Ah, why couldn't I kill at least one Muscovite!"" Oh Titus - Titus! * Studgard. What's going on with her? Where is? - Poor! ""Maybe in the hands of Moscow!"" – A Muscovite crosses her – strangles her – murders, kills! – Ah, my Life, I am here alone – come to me – I will wipe away your tears, I will heal the wounds of the present by reminding you of the past. At that time, when there were no Muscovites yet. – At that time, when only a few Muscovites wanted to please you the most, and you mocked them because I was there – [word deleted] me, not Grab...! - Do you have a mother? ""And so bad!"" - I have a good one! ""Maybe I don't even have a mother anymore."" Maybe a Muscovite killed her... murdered her - sisters without sense, they don't give up - no - Father in despair, doesn't know how to cope, there is no one to raise Mother. – And here I am idle, and here I am with bare hands, sometimes I only groan, I ache at the piano, I despair – and what nada[l]? - God, God. Move the earth, let the engulfment [!] of the people of this age. Let the most severe torments torment the French who did not come to our aid."
"My dear life! You tell me that you were ill - why wasn't I there! I wouldn't have allowed it, and I'm surprised you didn't stop your slanting dance from doing it. 'Because there's nothing worth thinking about in this world either; if you were here, you would care about this maxim - every Frenchman jumps, screams, even if he is naked. – I got here quite happily (but expensively) – I am satisfied with what I found here; – I have the first musicians in the world and the first opera in the world. 'I know Rossini-Cherubini, Paëra, etc., etc., and may stay here longer than I thought. – Not because I feel so good here, but because I can slowly get better. – But you are happier – you are getting closer to yours; mine - maybe I'll never see them. – You won't believe how many Poles are here. Of these [two illegible words] they don't live together and they don't look for each other, but you will find a lot of them in Berlin. Freymanek, with whom I miraculously met at the Italian opera, is staying here after returning from England, of which he cannot boast. ""His father is with his family in Berlin, he told me to inform you, he will probably be pleasant to see you if you suffer from these so common in our country consumption sac."" ""Besides, Romuald is supposed to be there, as you can find out from Alfons Brandt, the son of that doctor from my hometown."" - Alphonse is studying medicine - it's easy to ask about him. - If you find it, give me a kiss, because he's one of my closest friends - Romuald spent his whole life in their house. ""He can tell you about many other friends who stay there."" - As much as Benedykt assured me here, he knows for sure that Karol (he was a quack doctor) at home, which will probably reassure you about your family. What Seweryn does, I know as much as I know about Antoni and Włodzia. – However, I am thinking of finding out something about the Bayers, because today I am having dinner with Radziwiłł (whom I found here), with Walenty, the elder brother of what Stecka has - at the Komars, with whom I know that Bayer was in correspondence. Yesterday I had dinner with Mrs. Potocka, Mieczysław's pretty wife. I'm slowly launching myself into the world, but I only have a ducat in my pocket! ""It's even better than you!"" But I'm not writing to you about the impression this big city made on me after Studgard and Strasbourg. – There is the greatest splendor, the greatest filth, the greatest virtue, the greatest vice, every step there are posters on the wen. sickness[!] - shouting, yelling, rattling and mud more than you can imagine - you get lost in this swarm and it's comfortable because no one asks how anyone lives. You can walk the street in winter like a ragged man, and frequent the first companies - one day you will eat the richest dinner for 32 sous in the Mirror Restaurant, illuminated with gold and gases - the next day you can go to breakfast, where they will give you, as for a bird, and you will pay 3 times as much; that's how it used to be here at first, until I paid the due fry. - What, merciful ladies! – they chase people, but still there is no shortage of stout Azdrubals; I regret that the memory of Teresa, despite Benedict's efforts, who nevertheless [word deleted] considers my poverty very small, does not allow me to taste the forbidden fruit. And I already know a few singers - and the singers here, even more like those in Tyrol, would like duets. - Sometimes on my 5th floor (I'm standing at 27 Boulevard Poissoni?re, No. 27, you won't believe how nice I live, I have a room beautifully furnished in mahogany, with a porch overlooking the boulevards, from which I can see from Montmartre to the Panthéon and along the whole beautiful world; many envy me my view, but no one of the stairs). Well, sometimes when I look through the letters in the evening or write something in that album and look at the litany, it seems to me that all these reminders in a dream, I do not believe what really happened - and especially the expedition to Schwarzbach seems to me unlikely - those Americans ! - Ah! nothing equal. ""When will we remember this eye to eye!"" - I'm thinking of staying here for 3 years - I live very closely with Kalkbrenner, the first pianist in Europe, whom you would surely like. (He is the only one whose shoe strap is not worthy of me. Such Herze, etc. – I tell you that only fanfarons, and they will never play better.) Well, sitting here for 3 years, maybe Bezendzia will come – maybe I will kiss and play again Stumma. Be of good cheer - let everything happen according to your will. – I hope so; take an example from Newazendzia, which has lost many friends in the field, which has old parents and instead of helping them, it still sits on their backs, which loves like peas against a wall, which today is orphaned of friends and must sigh somewhere in Berlin! Yours forever Fritz. Filing with Karwowski, a former prosector at our University, went to London for a month. Stansio borrowed from me while I had it; he walks to the Palais Royal - that's the whole point of him coming here. He expects a salary from the government - as a distinguished traveling Austrian - such a bang! [deletion] Forgive my haste, if this piece of paper is too stupidly written. But you know I prefer acting as I write. - Pos.... sick - and your ""Holy Cross above all"" [deletion]. Tell Alfons that Kondratowicz, lieutenant, visited me yesterday, tell him, let him write to me too. You told me a lot about Deboli's death by the way, because I calmed down a few of his friends who stayed here and wondered why they had no news from him. ""Write to me too, don't be lazy!"" – [last line cut off]."
"My dear child. From the content of your last letter I see with pleasure that a stay in Paris will give you more advantages than a stay in Vienna, and in many respects; for I am deeply convinced that you will not miss any opportunity to perfect yourself in the art to which you have devoted yourself. Getting to know famous artists, talking to them, hearing their works performed by them and experiencing them can only be of great benefit to a young person who is trying to make his way. The kindness shown to you by Mr. Kalkbrenner is flattering to you, and as a father I am sincerely obliged to him for it. But I cannot understand, my dear, how, in view of the talents which he says he has found in you, he predicts that it will take three more years for you to become an artist and learn under his tutelage. I am not able to understand this last word, although I asked Elsner about its meaning, in whom you have a true friend, so I refer you to his letter. You know that I have done everything in my power to second your abilities and develop your talent, that I have not opposed you in anything; you also know that you spent little time on the technique of playing and that your mind worked more than your fingers. While others spent whole days at the keyboard, you rarely spent an entire hour performing other people's songs. All things considered, a three-year term is beyond my imagination. However, I do not want to oppose you in anything, I would only be grateful to you if you would postpone the decision until you have thought, listened and thought carefully. As soon as you arrive, you say yourself that you cannot lift your head yet and show what you can do; so wait a little longer. Genius may attract the attention of connoisseurs from the first moment, but they do not see its peak, so give them time to get to know you better, and do not take on commitments that could get in the way of you. I won't dwell on it any more. I hope that as I write these words you have already received the modest allowance which I sent to you in the hands of Mr. J. Lafitte. I kiss you with all my heart and advise you not to place too much trust in any of the newcomers. Your mother presses you to her heart. Ch."
"dear friend! I learn with great pleasure that the first piano player (as you wrote) Kalkbrenner received you so well; (I knew his father well in Paris in 1805, and at that time his young son was famous among the first piano players). I am all the more pleased that he has promised you to discover the secrets of his art. But it amazes me that it means three years! Should he know from the first sight and hearing of you that you will need so much time to understand his method?! that your musical genius should be devoted only to the clavichord and your artistic disposition should be sacrificed only for this kind of composition? I hope that after getting to know you further and better, he will change his mind. If he wishes to contribute to our art in general in your person with his artistic knowledge, if he is your friend, thank him as a student. As for me, I confess that I would like to have your friend Linowski as my pupil. He has a lot of enthusiasm for music and quite a talent for composition. But he has to work almost whole days to earn a living and save a few zlotys for the future. But as for you, and even for Nidecki, I never thought of making you my disciples; I say this proudly, although I congratulate myself on having given you lessons in harmony and composition. In the study of composition, rules should not be given, especially to pupils whose abilities are evident; let them invent it themselves, that they may sometimes surpass themselves, let them have the means of finding that which has not yet been found. In the mechanism of art, even in the performance part, it is necessary not only for the student to equal his master and surpass him, but also for him to have something of his own with which he could also excel. Playing the instrument, even the most perfect, e.g. by Paganini on the violin, Kalkbrenner on the piano, with everything that it enchants, be it the specific character of the instrument, or the originality of the composition used to emphasize and enhance its qualities - this playing, considered in itself , is the only measure in the field of music as a speech of feelings. The fame once enjoyed by Mozart and then Beethoven as piano players has long since passed away and their piano compositions, despite the resistance of the features of classical nobility contained in them, had to give way to the taste of newer fashion. On the other hand, their other works, not tied to only one instrument, their operas, songs, symphonies, still live among us and exist next to today's works of art. Sapienti pauca [1]. One cannot advise the student to dwell too long on one method, manner, one nation's taste, etc. What is true and beautiful should not be imitated, but experienced according to its own and higher laws. Neither a man nor a nation should serve as a model (as non plus ultra); only the eternal and invisible nature is and contains it. People and nations provide only examples that have more or less succeeded. Finally, in a word: what an artist (always using everything that surrounds him and teaches him) astonishes his contemporaries can only have from himself and by perfecting himself. For the reason for this and his truly deserved glory both in the present and in posterity is none other than his brilliant individuality living in his works of craftsmanship. I was amused by giving back the red pencil, because I remembered that Mrs. Szymanowska, having returned from England (where she met Kalkbrenner) and gave a concert with us, gave away red pencils at her rehearsal to cross out some bars here and there in the Hummel Concerto, h- minor, though she had shortened it before. Moreover, in variations whose author I do not remember, and which suffered the same fate as poor Hummel, she inserted some Field's andante. It's abuse! We only had to listen to Mrs. Szymanowska and only admire her fingers. The notion of the whole in a work is the hallmark of a true artist; the craftsman puts stone upon stone, beam upon beam. It is precisely this ability to understand, supported by faith in the continuous progress of art and true love for its works, that leads to mutual and friendly encouragement, it resembles the pursuit of a beautiful goal. She will not allow anything to be deleted or allowed to be deleted from the works of the older masters without mature deliberation. Therefore, I am glad that he left you the freedom to arrange yourself in this regard, to cross out what may have seemed too long to him and his listeners. the rest later. Please declare Mr. Plater, Woj. Grzymala, Hofmann, etc. my respect. For Lesueur, Paer, Kalkbrenner, Naderman, Norblin, the lowest bows. Orlowski please. Be healthy and happy as your true friend Józef Elsner wishes you. [1] Sapienti pauca (Latin) - the wise need few words."
"My dear Fry. You won't believe what a strong impression your letter made on us. Both Ludwika and I could not sleep for joy. But it was our strong imagination that got us. Reading each word several times, we seemed to see in your Protector, who offered you protection, an extraordinary man; we were glad that you would fall into his hands; but every apparent joy, not founded on foundations which nothing can shake, must collapse, and so ours has passed. These words: Brother and Father, moral superiority, occupied me so much that you cannot imagine. I pictured this man as Your Father, not like Papa, but one who, giving You advice, would direct Your future destiny; I saw, but rather understood, that he would be a Brother, having only one degree of education. But these illusions, however pleasing to me, always left me with the doubt which those three unfortunate years had given rise to. Such a talent as yours to know and appreciate, one must be much higher; you write about the difference and I believe it, but I have no doubt that you would be able to erase it without three years. – But what I write are not warnings; because I never want to give them to you, but I wanted to tell you what effect your letter had on our minds. My dear, we are healthy and we are no longer happy that you are healthy, that you wrote, because now we sigh to your letters more often than before. Ludwika, I don't know if she wrote to you that Mother asks you to set a time, how often you will write to us, so as not to delude yourself, but rather to deceive. Although I doubt that this will help, because if you write every two weeks, Mom will expect a letter a week in advance. My music has now ceased; my hands are so swollen from the cold that I can't play. I am replaced by young Lasocki, because although he has his pantalion, because he is not yet in tune, he plays yours, or rather reads Kurpiński's school with yours, which Mr. Żywny orders to consider carefully. Mr. Fronckiewicz was here yesterday, with a business as a Bib[liotekarz] to Papa. I've already finished Papa's job. We expect his letter from you on his name day and we are happy in advance. Love me Izzy. Jędrze[jewicz] and Bar[ciński] came and met us; the first sideways, as if he did not know the second. He hadn't been young since then, and that was Saturday."
"Dearest Fritz. I understand very well that today's letter will cause you some discomfort because of a partly different opinion from yours, and I feel sorry for you that you will perhaps have some embarrassment about it. - The moment we received your letter, we were so pleased with Kalkbrenner, we were so pleased that even though it was already after nine o'clock when the reading ended, I immediately got down to writing and reported to you with rapture that none of us was against it, that we unanimously send you the desired yes, and I was even surprised that you could think that you would write back on the contrary. Kalkbrenner delighted me: I already saw in him, through my imagination, the man God grant that everyone should be; I saw nobility, moral superiority; You, my dear, I did not even hesitate to give you into my hands. But the next day we went to the good Elsner, who not only loves you, but perhaps more than anyone wants your fame and thorough knowledge, etc. (I may have worded it ridiculously, but forgive me, my dear). He, therefore, after hearing the letter, was not satisfied, as we were, exclaiming ""envy already, three years"", nodding his head, although I talked to him, surprised that he was of the opposite opinion at first, and I pointed out the merits of Kalkbr. and his love of art, and I read these words several times that he had no interest in doing so, etc. None of this helped. Elsner frowned and said that he would write to you himself with the addition: I know Fryderyk, he is good, he has no self-love, little will to progress; they easily master it. I will write to him as I understand it. Indeed, this morning he brought the letter I am sending you, and he talked to us even more about it. We, judging in the simplicity of our hearts about people, did not think that Kalkb. he was nothing but the most worthy man. Els. and it doesn't quite keep it that way. And so he talked today: they met a genius in Fry[deryk] and they are already tempted not to be taller than them, so they want to hold him in their hands for three years to stop whatever nature would push. Calbr. from [two words illegible] not full of the virtues of Italy; Mrs Szyma[nowska] was supposed to say about Kalkbrenner, que c'est un filout [1] , so this is some kind of speculation on Fryderyk - let alone that he would call him his elev - but there is one that, despite the love of art, embarrassing Your genius aims. Elsner says that he does not understand what kind of school he requires, and then adds: if he has this school himself, so without signing up for three years, if it concerns execution, you can understand it yourself and take over, if you like it. Because Elsner does not want you to imitate, and express yourself well: all imitation is not originality; since you will imitate, you will not be original, and although you are younger, your ideas may be better than those already experienced; you have a natural genius and your songs are fresher and better; you have Field's playing, although you have heard Zyw[ny] - what does that prove? And then, Mr. Elsner doesn't want to see you only as a concert artist and piano composer and famous performer, because it's easier and less important than writing operas, but he wants to see you as what nature pushes you to do and what nature has made you capable of. You have [illegible word] a place between Rossini, Mozart, etc. Your genius is not to settle on the piano and concerts, you are to immortalize yourself from operas. He says that as educated as you are, in which you are superior to all perhaps once your age and today famous authors, with such a genius you should go where genius takes you, and not follow anyone. At first (apparently, as he said) people laughed at Mozart, they didn't want to play his compositions, only his predecessors, and only later did they evaluate. Everything progresses, the new genius cannot be the old one. Be careful what Elsner writes to you, read carefully; he seems to be right. He maintains that these are all phrases that eblouise [2] and, despite their sincerity, are insincere (God, why do such people exist!). You yourself feel what is good, because after hearing so many people playing, you were able to assess the value of each; the very fact that you knew how to judge proves your superiority. Elsner maintains that there is no great love for art, only for himself and his pocket; it seems very far calculation, but it is explained like this: why didn't Liszt want to accept the proposal, when so good, Liszt so far from you? Why didn't he find someone else with a talent that he would have the ambition to place on that grade, as far as execution is concerned. He will offer you his concert hall, and for four months you can travel, because then he will not give concerts, because it is not the time. You wouldn't belong to it, but the complaisance [3] would make you pay it off with politeness; you would always be inferior when you could be superior to him and many. He also says: what if Reicha (whom he is surprised you haven't met yet), also moved by your goodness in terms of composition, was equally ambitious and wanted to enroll you again for three years? He was terribly angered by what he called boldness and arrogance; giving a pencil to draw out a passage having only scanned the partition, never having heard the concerto in full effect with the orchestra. He says that if I had given you advice that you should try to make a shorter allegro in the second writing, it would be a different matter; but he cannot forgive what has already been written. He compared it to a house already built, and when it is all finished, someone thinks that one pillar is too many, and they want to transform the thing by taking it out, or rather by destroying what does not seem good. Elsner maintains that this step is already a step to degut [4] you and from afar make you feel that you are not yet perfect. He immediately added: and Kalkbr. concert not long? although not as delightful. Who was he comparing you to? He gave, for example, Hertz, Liszt, Sowinski. It seems that Elsner rightly maintains that in order to be superior, one must not only surpass the teacher, but also one's contemporaries. One can imitate them and surpass them, but then it will be following them, and he necessarily maintains that you today, feeling what is good and better, should pave your own way; Your genius will guide you. What else he added: Fryderyk has this originality and this rhythm, or whatever, from his native land, which makes him all the more original with lofty thoughts and characterizes him; would like you to have it. Only in operas can you feel it better, everyone will know who you are, which will make you a lot of supporters; especially now that you have so many of your own there, more than anyone can impress with your music. Elsner advises you that if someone writes some trick from the times we haven't seen each other, that you take care of making music slowly; so that you don't refuse if someone offers you. Elsner wants you to be glorified from concerts, but says that this is not your end point, because you have genius. Your operas, not only piano music, are to make you first. Oh my dear Fry! poor you, for I foresee that you will have much trouble if you decide to refuse. Mr. Elsner, however, says that you will probably write us an answer beforehand, Kalkbr. has he not reduced time and what does he mean by this European stigma of the artist, this school that Mr. E. does not understand; because if it's an execution, you'll understand it sooner than three years and apply it to your method. My dear Frycia, we don't understand things either way, we don't advise you, we send you comments; take your time with the answer, you can still write what you think, what Kalkbr. to Elsner's letter (because he says you can show it to him). Elsner will give you friendly advice, because it's about not stopping you from running. Elsner says that if this proposal had been made in a different way, it would not have been recognized so quickly, but this is how you can see the paw. You won't believe how much this hurts me. That someone from the roads who used to be with you was right, how you exhibited jealousy, which you will be the cause of when you come to Paris. Not agreeing, though in the most polite way, will always not be pleasant, and I fear malice; and to agree, and it is better for others to do to themselves, still in this regard, is terrible. True, there is no way to learn, we are of the same opinion as you; man can never get enough. To study under the guidance of someone who wants our progress, but here not everyone seems to want your progress. Because it's all trifles to reject it so as not to call yourself an elew, to be ashamed to learn; let's leave this misunderstood self-love and shame to fools. Neither you nor we see retrogradation in science, but here, in this case, El. is afraid that these 3 years, in which you could make huge progress, would not be a barrier to him. I advise you nothing, my dear; let your instinct guide you, you understand it best yourself. El. thinks that after reading his letter, you might change your mind and willingness a bit. As for the three years of stay there, it does not cause us not to write to you right away, because we are already prepared for the fact that we will not see you sooner. And if you should bother to visit us all the way, not wanting you to suffer such an unpleasant stagecoach journey, we would be ready to go halfway to you to embrace you. God, give you only health and that the circumstances would be so happy that you would have all those who are favorable to you. Why can't I be with you! Not much that I would be useful, but sometimes I might not be in the way. Marceli wrote from Krakow that in desperation for you, because he knows nothing about you, you haven't written back to him yet; he asks you to take pity on him and tell him what is happening to you. You will be together next year. And you will see Fontana in a few weeks, because his uncle visited us one day and found out about your address. Hofmeister wrote to Sennewald to send him everything that is yours to be printed or already printed. There was Nowakowski; he wanted those rondas, something he had lithographed for Moriolles, but Papa wouldn't give it. do you order? they will give it. You do not write about Aleksandrinka, does she really not deserve your affections? Letter El. you can show Lesueur, you even have. – My dear Fryciu, we are all healthy. [Papa] will be struggling so much now and won't talk, because he gives calligraphy in high school and half of the hours in German; it's good! Mrs. Sow[ińska] always asks about you most tenderly. Berend found that your bust is more like a portrait, and Bar[cinski], who arrived the day before, is the same. - Mr. Hoge, who brought him, made us happy by giving us an assurance about you, when we asked what are you doing there, are you well: ""Hey, you are well and you can be calm, because he can find himself."" Good one, I think to myself, or there's only one good one in the world. My dear Fryciu, maybe a certain Szymański will go to you there; take him under your care at first, that is, advise him what to do if he asks you. Give him money if he needs it. His mother lives in the house we live in. He asks for it very much, and you know that it is pleasant for a foreigner to find an acquaintance at least, if not a friend, at first; And your good heart will be to him what poor mother would like. That's what your mother told you to write. – He is a kind person. You have probably already received the money so far; We are very glad that your thought made sense. – I see that you are in a better mood, but I am afraid that this embarrassment will not spoil it for you again, though, I think, only for a short time; because once he found so many good friends, they can cheer you up, although people can't always cheer you up: sometimes you would like to be far away from them. When we read your footnote, we erased it immediately; it tempted the elders, but they did not know the secret. That I can't do excuses, I admitted that it was my hand-made smear, and for what purpose. Pan Fryc stupid, great terefere. You do not understand what cases are among men; when prejudice and conceit settle in the brain, they can cause stupidity. You won't believe how I grieve over people! – Eleo [nora] Wolska visited us yesterday and she was there the other day; they are so kind that they absolutely want to entrust us with their nephew, but there is no room for him. Pretty, but not as promised; in the portrait she found you so similar that she remembered a Cossack dancing you in the old days. If Szymanski wants money, you can promote him to a hundred francs; Mother's mother begged. Have you received the letter that Lorca wrote to you yet? [...] Montebella, we sent you a note from Dzi[wanowski]. - Pruszakowa has already returned. Oleś is still a virgin, but apparently soon. While your letter contained many facets and novelties pleasing to us, this one honors them completely; but there is no bad thing that doesn't work out for good: lighter, it will reach you faster. P. Fryderyk is a bit weak; time to get sick. Mr. Michał in the countryside, cheers. Contessa number I died, he wished that number two. Zuzia is coming; I don't know how she'll decide, poor thing. Mrs. Cicho[wska] went to Dresden: grand personnage [5] because she was with her son. Big Cas [6] makes a sister-in-law out of it. She went to her husband, she writes to us; anxious that we don't write back. An interesting thing, however, why letters reach everyone, and they were not supposed to come from us, which we are known as a bad penny, but a lie. Skrodzki is still panting, but he deserves little. Be well, my dear Frycie; I kiss you a million times. Make sure you're happy now and then. ""As for writing, it would be embarrassing for you to set a time and want it to be set."" Write when you want and how you will have the mood and circumstances after that. Write a lot. Love us, because we love you more than life. LC All your friends hug you from the soul, heart: Żyw., Bar., Jędr., Col., Witw. etc. [1] Que c'est un filou[t] – that he is a fraud. [2] Eblouisą (from French éblouir) – here: dazzling, dazzling. [3] Complaisance (French) - courtesy. [4] To degut (from French dégo?ter) – to disgust someone with something, to arouse disgust. [5] Grand personnage (French) – a great figure. [6] Cas (French) - event."
Dear Mr. Chopin, I will come to you tomorrow morning at 8 o'clock. Norblin.
"My dearest life! I revived when I received your letter. your injury! Various news reached me, I interpreted the words of letters from home in various ways, and the Cat, who wrote to me, expressed himself in such a strange way in the letter that I was afraid of the thoughts that crowded my mind. After all, we will meet again in life! What varieties, what poverty - who would have foreseen it when. – Do you remember the night council in Vienna on the eve of your departure! The wind has driven me here; – you breathe sweetly – but maybe that's why you sigh more because it's easy. Paris is everything you want - you can have fun, be bored, laugh, cry, do anything you like, and no one will look at you, because here thousands of people doing the same thing as you - and each in his own way. Anyway, I don't know if there are more pianists than in Paris - I don't know if there are more donkeys and more virtuosos like here. You need to know that I came here with very few recommendations. Malfati gave me a letter to Paer, I had some letters from Vienna to the editors, and that was it. For in Studgard, where the news of the taking of Warsaw reached me, it was there that I completely decided to go to this other world. Through Paer, who is the court bandmaster here, I got to know Rossini, Cherubini, etc., Baillot, etc. Through him I also met Kalkbrenner. You won't believe how much I was curious about Herz, Liszt, Hiller, etc., all these are zeros against Kalkbrenner. I will admit that I played like Herz, but I would like to play like Kalkbrenner. If Paganini is perfection, then Kalkbrenner parallels him, but in a completely different kind. It is hard for you to describe his calm [1], his charming touch - unheard of equality and this mastery painted in every note of his - he is a giant trampling Herz, Czerny etc., and thus also me. ""What's going on?"" – Presented to Kalkbrenner, he asks me to play him something. I am glad not to hear it beforehand, and knowing how Herz plays, taking pride from my heart, I sit down. I played my E minor, which the Rhenish Lindpaintners, Bergi, Stuntze, Schunki and all of Bavaria could not boast of. I surprised Mr. Kalkbr., who immediately addressed the question to me, which is not Field's disciple, that I have Cramer's game and Field's stroke. – (It pleased me in my soul), and even more so when, having sat down to the piano, Kalkbr., wanting to blow himself up in front of me, made a mistake and had to stop! But you also had to listen to him reprise; I didn't think anything of the sort. Since then, we see each other every day, either he at my place or I at his place - and having got to know me well, he proposes that I study with him for three years, and he will make something very, very much out of me. I told him that I know how much I don't get, but that I don't want to imitate him and that 3 years is too much. Instead, he convinced me that I could play beautifully when I was inspired and bad when I wasn't - something that never happens to me. He told me, looking closer, that I had no school - that I was on a fine road, but I could get derailed [2]. – That there will be no representative of the great piano school after his death, or if he does not play at all. That I cannot build a new school, even if I wanted to, without knowing the old one - in a word, that I am not a perfect machine, and thus hamper the course of my thoughts. That I have a mark on the composition, it would be a pity if I wasn't what I promise to be, etc., etc. If you were here, you'd say yourself: learn, boy, while there is time. Many advised me against it - thinking that I could play as well as he, that he did it out of pride, so that he would later call me his student, etc., etc. These are all guys. You need to know that while here for the talent of Kalkbr. everyone has it, and everyone respects it, that's why they hate his person - because he's a big fool, brothers, and as I love you, there is something higher than all I've heard. I wrote to my parents about it. ""They're getting along somehow."" But to Elsner it seems like envy. Despite this (you must know that I already have a huge name among the artists here) I am giving a concert on December 25th. Baillot, that famous rival of Paganini, plays, Brodt, the famous oboist, I give my F minor Variations in B major, for which I received a few days ago in Cassel from a German enthusiastic [!] with these Variations, a ten-sheet review, where after in huge prefaces, he proceeds to dissect them bar by bar - he explains that these are not variations like any other, but that it is some fantastic tableau [3] . – On the second Variation, he says that Don Juan runs with Leporello, on the third, that he hugs Zerlinka, and Mazetto in his left hand is angry – and on the Adagio, the fifth bar says that Don Juan kisses Zerlinka in D flat major. Yesterday, Plater asked me where she had D-flat major, etc. Dying from the imagination of a German who insisted that his brother-in-law give it to Fetis for Revue Musicale, for which kind Hiller, a boy with great talent (a former student of Humla , whose Concerto of the Last Year and Symphony made a great impact - he is like Beethoven, but a man full of poetry, fire and spirit), he barely saved me from it, telling this Mr. Let's get back to the concert. In addition, I play with Kalkbrenner for two pianos, accompanied by 4 other Marches suivie d'une Polonaise. This is a crazy thought. One is a huge pantalion, which belongs to Kalkbrenner, and the other is a tiny monochord, but loud as giraffe bells, which belongs to me, and the other four are as big as an orchestra. Hiller, Osborn, Stamaty and Sowiński will hold her. The latter was no match for Alex. deceased (whom I met here elewka). A poor head, only a good figure and a heart. Norblin, Vidal, the famous Urhan - viola - that I've never heard, they help me. The tickets are in place. Singers were the hardest to get. Rossini would have let me from the opera, if he could have done it himself, without Mr. Robert, the other director, who did not want to expose himself to 200 or 300 similar requests. But I haven't written to you about the opera so far. Anim heard The Barber last week through Lablach, Rubini, and Malibran (Garcia). Anim heard Othello as through Rubini, Pasta, and Lablach; – Italians like Rubini, Lablach and Mme Raimbeaux. If ever, now I have everything in Paris. You will not imagine what Lablache is! Pasta, they say she lost it, but I've never seen anything more sublime. Malibran with her wonderful voice only takes, and sings like no other! Wonder! Wonder! Rubini is an excellent tenor, takes real, not a foset, and sometimes does roulette for 2 hours (but sometimes he flounders for too long and shakes his voice on purpose, besides he trills endlessly, which, however, sends him the greatest applause). His mezza voce is beyond comparison. There is Schröder-Devrient here - but it does not make a sensation like in Germany. Mrs. Malibran played the part of Othello and she played Desdemona. Malibran was small and the German woman huge, it seemed that the German woman Otella would suffocate her. It was an expensive representation, no more, only 24 francs all seats - to see Malibran black and not very good in this role. They're supposed to give Pirata and Somnambula, etc. Pasta has already left - they say she won't sing anymore. A marvelous orchestra, unlike the real French opera (l'Académie Royale). – If ever there was any splendor in the theater, I do not know if it reached the degree of splendor of Robert le Diable, Mayerber's brand new 5-act opera, which Crociato wrote. This is a masterpiece of the new school - where devils (huge choirs) sing through horns, where souls rise from the graves, but not as in Charlatan, but grouped in groups of 50, 60, where a diorama in the theater, where at the end of the intérieur [4] of the church you can see and the whole church at Christmas or Easter in the light with the monks and all the audience in their pews, with incense, and even more so: with an organ whose voice on stage enchants and amazes, and the whole orchestra almost covers it - they will not be able to stage anything like this anywhere. ""Mayerber has immortalized himself!"" But he also sat in Paris for three years before staging it, and, as they say, he spent 20,000 francs on acting. Madame Cinti-Damoreau also sings like that, it couldn't be better - I prefer her singing like Malibran. Malibran amazes, Cinti delights – and he does chromatic scales better than Toulon, famous for his flute. It is impossible to have a voice better perfected, it costs her so little that she seems to be breathing on the audience. Nourrit, the French tenor, is astonishing in his feeling. – And Cholet at the Opéra Comique, where they give Fra Diavolo, La Fiancée and Zampa (a new, lovely opera by the Herald), he is the first lover here, séducteur [5] – irritating – wonderful, with a true romance voice, a genius. He made a kind. At the Opéra Comique they now play the Marquise de Brinvili?re, the woman who poisoned people in the days of Louis 14 or 15. Eight men composed the music for it: Cherubini, Paer, Berton, Herold, Auber, Bâton, Blanguini and Caraffa. – I expect it would be difficult to find a more beautiful company for a concert! Write to me what you think, but then you must be careful that I am not mad - nor do I want to make a fool of myself. – Pixis with great respect for me - it's because I play, it's because he's jealous of his girlfriend who looks at me better than him! – Write to me for God's sake – or come; yours until death, and maybe soon F. Chopin. The old potter is excellent! Young and Herwet are here. And Evra, and Tiery, and Filés, but I didn't see them. I live at Boulevard Poissoni?re No. 27, and you didn't tell me your apartment, I had to ask Wodziński. Pleyel pianos non plus ultra. – Of the Poles, I see Kunasik, Morawski, Niemoj[owski], Lelewel, Plichta, and, moreover, a huge number of fools. Miss Jaczorek is a frequent visitor, but nothing more. Pretty. Oleszczyński is supposed to etch me in perspective. I was with Brykczyński the other day on a visit to Tyszkiewiczowa, but Poniatowski is not here yet; I'm going to Montabella today. If it wasn't for the Wodzińskis, I wouldn't know your address, scatterbrain. The Wodzińskis expect you here, I only want you sometimes, because I hardly go mad with longing, especially when it rains. Miss Gładkowska married Grabowski, but this does not prevent platonic affections. At that moment, Baillot arrived. I seal the letter. love me. I can't transfer it on myself, so as not to write you my fight with Pixis. Imagine, he has a very pretty 15-year-old girl with whom (as he says) he is thinking of marrying, and with whom I met in Studgard, visiting him. - Pixis, having come here, invites me to his place without saying anything (for perhaps I should have visited him sooner) that this girl of his, whom I have already forgotten, has come with him. He asks me to visit him, so I go in a week. Until, on the stairs, his young pet meets me with great pleasure, invites me to his place, that it's okay, that Mr. Pixis is not there - to rest - that he will come soon, etc. (Some shiver takes us both.) - I excite myself knowing that the old man is jealous, that I will come in another time, etc., meanwhile, while we talk so tenderly on the stairs in the innocence of the heart, Pixisko lies down, looks (looking at the shape of Soliwa) through thick glasses, who is talking to his bella up there - and, having quickened his stride, stops in front of me, the brusquement says: ""Bon jour"", and to her: ""Qu'est ce que vous faites ici?"" ” [6] – and a huge jeremiad of German devils on her that she dares to receive young people in his absence. I, too, smiling (and not feeling like anything) nod to Pixis and insist that he leaves the room so lightly (and only in a material dress), etc. Until the old man measured himself, cooled down, took me by the arm, led me into the living room , he did not know where to put me for fear (so that, being angry, when he is not at home, what a prank, or rather a pet, would not kill him). Later he brought me down the stairs, and seeing that I was still somehow laughing in my soul (I could not hide the joy I had for the first time at the fact that people might think me capable [7] of something like that) - I saw him go into the porter's office and ask whether it was long ago when I climbed the stairs, etc. Since then, Pixis has not been able to boast about my talent in front of all editors, and especially in front of Schlesinger, who engaged me to write something on Robert's themes, whom he bought from Meyerbeer for 24,000 francs! – How do you like it? I'm a séducteur! [1] Kalm (from French calme) – calm. [2] To derail (from French dérouter) – to derail. [3] Tableau - image. [4] Intérieur - interior. [5] Séducteur - seducer. [6] Brusquement - brutally; qu'est ce que vous faites ici? -  what are you doing here? [7] Capable - capable."
"Dear Mr. Elsner! Your letter was to me a new proof of this fatherly care, of those genuine sincere wishes which you deigned to keep for the most affectionate of your disciples. In 1830, although I saw how much I lacked and how far I was from meeting any of the models that I had in the Lord, if I wanted to try it, I dared to think: I will get a little closer to him, and if not Łokietek, then perhaps what Spindleshanks will come out of my brain. But today, seeing all such hopes dashed, I am compelled to think of making my way in the world as a pianist, putting aside only for a time the higher artistic prospects which you rightly present to me in your letter. To be a great composer, one would need a great deal of experience, which, as you taught me, is acquired not only by hearing others, but even more by hearing one's own works. A dozen or so talented young people, students of the Paris Conservatory, are waiting with their arms folded for performances of their operas, symphonies, cantatas, which only Cherubini and Lessueur have seen on paper. (I'm not talking here about small theaters, which are also difficult to get to, and after snoring, for example, like Tomasz at Leopoldstadt, despite sometimes great advantages, you don't acquire any artistic significance.) Meyerbeer, for 10 years as an opera composer, proudly known, he worked, paid and sat in Paris for three years, before (when there were already too many Aubers) he came to stage the sensational work of Robert the Devil. In my opinion, as far as revelation in the musical world is concerned, happy is he who can be a composer and an actor together. They already know me as a pianist here and there in Germany; some musical newspapers have mentioned my concerts, hoping that they will soon see me occupying a place among the first virtuosos of my instrument (meaning: disce, puer, faciam these lords). Today I have the only opportunity to keep my innate promise: why should I not seize it? In Germany, I would not let anyone learn the piano, because although many felt that I still lacked something, they did not know what it was. And I did not see in my own eye that beam which hinders me from looking higher today. Three years is a lot! too much even, as Kalkbrenner himself, having looked at me better, admitted (which should prove to you that a true virtuoso with well-deserved glory does not know jealousy). However, I would agree to three years' work, if only I could thus make a big step in my undertakings. I have enough knowledge that I will not be a copy of Kalkbrenner - he will not be able to obliterate the perhaps too bold, but noble desire and thought: to create a new world for myself; and if I work, it will be to put myself on stronger legs. For Ries, already known from the piano, it was easier to collect good laurels for The Bride in Berlin and Frankfurt, and Spohr was called a violinist for a long time before he wrote Jessonda, Faust etc. I hope that you will not refuse me your blessing, knowing on what terms and with what enterprise I am proceeding. Your parents will probably tell you that my concert has been postponed until the 25th. I have great difficulty in arranging it, and if it weren't for Paër, Kalkbrenner, and especially Norblin (who bows to you prettily), I couldn't have given it in such a short time (they don't count two months for Paris). Baillot, very polite and pleasant, plays Beethoven's Quintet and Kalkbrenner with me a duo accompanied by 4 pianos. I know Reicha only by sight; you know how much I was curious about this man; I know a few students here who gave me a different idea of him. He doesn't like music: he doesn't even attend Conservatory concerts; he doesn't want to discuss music with anyone; in his lessons he only looks at his watch, etc.; the same Cherubini only rejoices about cholera and revolutions [1] . These gentlemen are dried butts, which you can only look at with respect, and you can learn from their works. Fetis again, whom I know and from whom one can really learn a lot, lives outside the city again and attends classes only in Paris, otherwise he would have been staying at St. Pelagia for debts, of which he has more, as ""Revue Musicale"" brings him. One must know that the law of debtors in Paris is to arrest ? domicile [2], therefore he does not stay in his domicile in Paris, but goes out of town, where the law cannot reach him for some time. The multitude, this confluence of people interesting in the art of music of all kinds, is astounding in mass. The three orchestras of the Academy, the Italians and the Fédeau are excellent; Rossini is the regisseur of his opera, which is the best edited in Europe. Lablache, Rubini, Pasta (who has now left), Malibran, Devrient-Schröder, Santini, etc. delight in a great tone three times a week. Nourrit, Levasseur, Dérivis, Mme Cinti-Damoreau, Mlle Dorus elevate the great opera. Cholet, Mlle Casimir, Prevost are the admiration of Comic Opera; In a word, only here you can find out what singing is. Today, reliably, not Pasta, but Malibran (Garcia) is the first in Europe - a miracle! Walenty Radziwiłł melts over her and sometimes we show you on this occasion, as if you admired her! The Lessueur thanks you very much for remembering and has you declare a million bows; he remembers you the most pleasantly and every visit he asks me: Et que fait notre bon Monsieur Elesenere, racontez moi des ses nouvelles [3], and immediately goes to your Requiem, which you sent him. We all love and adore you here, starting with me and ending with my godson, Antoni Orłowski, who apparently won't be coming to stage his operetta anytime soon, because the theater [4] is not the best, and besides, the theater is closed until New Year's . The king does not pour money, there is nothing between the artists at all, the English only pay. I would write until tomorrow; enough of this boring stuff. Please accept the assurances of my gratitude and respect with which I remain the most devoted student of the FF until my death. Chopin. I kiss Mrs. and Miss Elsner's hands and wish you all the best for the New Year. [1] Radotuje (French radoter) - a story, a waffle. [2] A domicile – in a flat. [3] Et que fait... ses nouvelles – and what does our Mr. Elsner do, tell me something about him. [4] Sujet (French) – subject; here: libretto."
"My dearest life! For the second year, as you from beyond the tenth [!] I have to congratulate you on your name day. One daydream could keep you more in my heart than ten letters. That's why I'm leaving this matter, ex abrupto [1] I don't want to write, and I didn't buy myself a booklet with various congratulations, which girls and boys sell in the streets screaming for 2 sous. - They are strange people, when evening comes - you hear nothing but exclamations of the titles of new ephemera and sometimes you can buy 3 or 4 sheets of printed nonsense for a sousa. And this is L'art de faire des amants et de les conserver ensuite, Les amours des pr?tres, L'archev?que de Paris avec Mme la Duchesse du Barry [2] and thousands of similar fats, sometimes very witty. It's true that one has to wonder what methods they use to earn a penny. Know that here now there is great poverty, money is scarce, you meet a lot of scrappy people with significant physiognomies and you often hear a threatening conversation about the fool Philip, who only hangs on his ministry. The lower class is completely exasperated - and every moment advises to change the state of their misery, but, unfortunately, the government is too careful about such things, and at the slightest meeting of the common people in the street, the mounted gendarmerie disperses. You know that I live on the 4th floor, but in the most beautiful place, because on the boulevards, I have a porch belonging to me - very neat, iron, giving to the street - and I can see very far to the right and to the left. Opposite me in the street stood Ramorino, in what is called the Cité Berg?re, where a large courtyard passes. – You probably know how the Germans received him everywhere, how the French, having harnessed their horses, dragged him to Strasbourg, in a word, you know the people's enthusiasm [!] for our General. Paris did not want to be last in this regard. - The school of medicine, the so-called ""jeune France"" youth [3] (who wear beards and have certain rules for tying scarves), you must know that each political party wears it differently here - they say exagerated here. – Carlists have green vests, republicans napoleonists, this is jeune France – red vests, saintsimonists, i.e. new Christians, creating a separate religion and already having a huge number of proselytes who are also for equality, wear blue, etc., etc. a thousand such non-ministerial youth with the tricolor banner went through the whole city to Ramorin to greet him. Although he was at home, he did not want to expose himself to unpleasantness from the government (for this reason, the fool) did not show up despite shouting and calling ""vive [!] les Polonais"", etc. His adjutant (apparently Działyński) came out and said that General he asks them for another day. “But the next day he moved out of there. In a few days a huge crowd, not only of young people, but also of the common people gathered under the Pantheon, on the other side of Paris, to Ramorino, collapses. – Like a branch of snow, the more streets they pass, the greater their mass, until at the bridge (Pont Neuf) the cavalry begins to disperse them – many were injured, but nevertheless many people gathered on the boulevards, under my windows, to join with those walking on the other side of town. - The police could not help the crowding people: a unit of infantry came - hussars, adjutants of the square on horses on the pavements; no less zealous guard pushes the more and more curious and muttering populace, they catch - they arrest the free nation - fear - shops close, heaps of people on all corners of the boulevard streets - whistling - galloping errands, windows full of spectators (as once in our country on a great holiday), and it lasted from 11 am to 11 pm. I was already glad that something could be done, but it all ended with the singing of ""Allons enfants de la patrie"" in a huge choir around 11 am [4] . What an impression these menacing voices of an uncontented people made on me - you will not understand! - It was expected to start the next day the continuation of this emeuta [5], as they call it here - but the fools keep quiet to this day. Grenoble has only followed in the footsteps of Lyon - and the devil knows what else will happen in the world. They also now give at the theater ""Francon"", where only dramas and tableaus with horses are staged - the whole history of our last times. People fly like crazy to see all these costumes - Panna Plater, who also plays a role there with individuals whose names are like Lodoiska, Faniska - and that's what one is called Floreska - there is General Gigult as Platerówna's brother, etc. But nothing was so fun for me such as advertising in one of the smaller theaters that Dobruski's mazurka ""ieszore polska mirgineta"" will be played during the intermission. How I love you, not a guy, I have witnesses who were surprised with me that the French are so stupid! Speaking of my concert, postponed to the 15th because of a singer whom Mr. Veron, the director of the opera, refused me. Today, however, there is a big concert in the Italian opera, where Malibran, Rubini, Lablache, Santini, Mme Raimbeaux, Mme Schröder, Mme Cavadora - Herz is playing and (what is most interesting) Beriot, the violinist that Mrs. Malibran loves in him. I would like you here, you won't believe it, because how sad I am here that I have no one to express myself to. You know how easily I can take acquaintances, you know how I like to talk with them about blue almonds, well, I have such acquaintances up to my ears, but I can't sigh with anyone together. “I am always, as far as my feelings are concerned, in syncopation with others. That's why I'm getting tired and you won't believe how I'm looking for some kind of pause, no one would look at me all day, no one would talk to me. Writing to you, I hate it when my bell goes off - and something with mustaches comes in, big, tall, stout - it sits down at the piano and doesn't know what it's improvising, banging, smashing without meaning, throwing itself around, switching hands, with five minutes on one key rattles a huge finger, which somewhere in Ukraine was intended for economic whipping and reins. You have a portrait of Sowiński, who has no other merit [6] than a good figure and a good heart for himself. If ever I could imagine charlatanism or stupidity in art, it would never be so perfect as now I often have to listen to it as I walk and wash my room. My ears are red - I would push out the door, and I have to menage [7], even be affectionate with each other. You have no idea of anything like that - but because they here (they, who don't know each other, only tie) for something, so you have to fraternize. – And what spoils my blood the most is the collection of his tavern, senseless, worst accompanied, without the slightest knowledge of harmony and prosody composed songs with contredans endings – which he calls a collection of Polish songs. You know how much I wanted to feel and partly I came to the feeling of our national music - so measure how pleasant I feel - when he sometimes catches something of mine here and there, the beauty of which often depends on the accompaniment and tavern, Szenkatrynów-Gęgetów-organ parish taste he will play, and nothing can be said, because he will not understand more than what he has caught. This is Nowakowski on the left side. And talk! – About everything, especially about Warsaw, where he has never been. – Among the Poles I live most with the Wodzińskis, the Brykczyńskis, all good boys. Wodzyńsio always asks me, why won't you come? They expect you because they don't know you. ""I think I know you, and I know where you're going first."" At this moment, when I start to describe one ball, where I was delighted by one deity with a rose in black hair - I receive your letter. – Everything moderne [8] comes out of my head – I move even more to you, take you by the hand and cry. – I had your letter from Lviv – I'll see you later, or maybe not at all, because seriously, my poor health; I am cheerful on the outside, especially among my people (I call my own Poles), but inside something is killing me - some premonitions, anxieties, dreams or insomnia - longing - indifference - the will to live, and in the moment the wish to die - some sweet peace, some numbness, unconsciousness of the mind and sometimes the exact memory torments me. I am sour, bitter, salty, some hideous mixture of feelings is tossing me around! Dumber than when. My life, spare me. “Enough already. And now I'll get dressed and go, or rather I'll go to the dinner they're giving Ramorin and Langerman today, there's supposed to be a couple of hundred at the biggest restaurant, Au Rochercancal. A few days ago, Kunacik brought me invitations with Biernacki, the good-natured man; Charles therefore décidément [9] not his son-in-law. Your letter had a lot of news for me today. You gave me 4 pages and 37 poems, when I live, it wasn't like that when I live, so you didn't give me a lot - and I needed something similar - I needed it very much. What you write to me about the road is the truth I believe. Don't feel bad about it, darling; I am riding my own equipage, I only hired a carter for the horses. Pardon my life for the contrast of my letter. ""I'm done because I couldn't take it to the post office."" And the man himself master, himself servant. Write, have mercy. I hug you, yours until death Fryc. I am sending this letter in trust of Your mercy. [1] Ex abrupto (Latin) - suddenly, without preparation. [2] Titles: The Art of Winning and Keeping Lovers, The Loves of Priests, The Archbishop of Paris and the Duchesse du Barry. [3] Jeune France (French) – young France. [4] Allons enfants de la patrie (French) - the first words of the Marseillaise. [5] Emeuta (from French émeute) – rebellion, riots. [6] Meryt (from French mérite) – merit. [7] To menage (from French ménager) – to have favours. [8] Moderne (French) – contemporary. [9] Décidément (French) – definitely."
"[...] need, then put a separate piece of paper for me... guessing, not everyone can come up with the same thought, it will be better if only one person knows the truth. You probably have trouble with the concert again; we don't think you'll be successful on the 26th; I sincerely feel sorry for you; I wish you would get rid of this embarrassment once and let the opinion of Kalkbre. improved with Papa and Els who think he is being dishonest with you; sometimes I get impatient, because you have sense enough, though you are not old enough not to be fooled. But don't let this anger you, it all comes from great affection for you. Imagine that Mrs. Wiesio[łowska] came to Żelazowa Wola and Mr. Michał sent for us; but as Mama's stomach ached at that time, and the frost was heavy, and Papa had no time to walk for a day after leaving so close, none of us went. We were really sorry, but Mrs. Wie[siołowska] even winces with regret that she did not see us; we always do well in projects and fulfilling the most sincere desire, and so now they must have taken real impossibility as an excuse. Never mind. When people are so stupid that they care about the smallest trifle, and do not understand great things, it is not worth paying attention to them; worth little alone. Mr. Fry. we are very sorry, because he is doing well as a Jew, and it is not working out as he deserves; fate, when it sometimes picks on someone, can be annoying. It's too much for you to write everything; I leave you goodbye."
"My dear child. The obstacles you mention and the difficulties you encounter in preparing for the concert worry me all the more as it puts you in a constant rush and does not give you a moment's peace. In addition, it entails expenses that will cause you a lot of trouble. This worries me, especially since you don't tell us anything about the lessons you were supposed to receive through Mr. Kalk[brenner]. The acquaintances that you make every day when you are in the big world will undoubtedly be useful to you and your talent can gain publicity thanks to them; but if, God forbid, you find yourself in need, believe me, when your mind is less free, your art will suffer. I do not conceal from You that this troubles me, and that I would be very glad if You could dispel my fears. According to your last letter, the concert will take place on the 26th. God bless you, but I confess that I am afraid that all your efforts will be in vain as a result of these delays. However, since the date almost coincides with the day of your holiday, for which I send you my best wishes and heartfelt hugs, maybe this date will turn out to be more successful than the previous ones. As far as our financial situation is concerned, we have enough to live on, and we are in fairly good health. As for your health, I'm glad you seem to be looking better than before. Once again we press you to our heart, both with the Mother. Ch."
To the Members of the Concert Association Committee. Dear Gentlemen. I would like to be allowed to be heard at one of your excellent concerts, and I hereby ask for it. In the absence of other titles for this, I trust your kindness to artists and I dare to expect that you will be willing to accept my request favorably. I have the honor to remain your humble and obedient servant, F. Chopin.
"Dear Nowakoś! You ask me what I would like from the soul of my heart. You won't believe how I would like to see you here; and play together - and sigh together, feel, play together - just don't let go (this is something I can't hide from you, being a sincere and open friend of yours), don't let go, I repeat, without money to keep at least for a while enough for you. It is very difficult to get lessons here, and it is even more difficult to give a concert. Balliot, Herz, Blahetka announced this year did not give concerts; although the epidemic had not yet appeared in the city when their evenings were to be given. Because people are discouraged here and bored with everything for various reasons, but mostly political ones, which have paralyzed the whole country here - and the multitude of great donkeys and charlatans, more present here than anywhere else, does not allow true talent to break through so easily. Therefore, since everyone is used to charlatans, at first no one will believe you that you can play, but they will think that your name ending in ski is your greatest asset. So if you can come without asking anyone for anything for a while - I'll be waiting for you with a decent breakfast or dinner. We'll get drunk to greet you. By the way, I'm not waiting for you in the spring, because you won't see either Italian or French opera. Rossini drives away. Rubini, Lablache the same, Malibran in Bruxella, Devrient in London; The French, Nourrit, Levasseur, Cinti with Majerber, go there for Robert's exhibition. As for the pianists, Herz is going to England. Mendelson ditto. Pixis to Germany, Letter to Switzerland, Kalkbrenner doesn't know what to do, he's so fucking scared; Hiller in Frankfurt. – So there will be Bertini, Schunke, who are nothing against List or Kalkbrenner. So I advise you to postpone it until May - at least until the French Opera returns from London. Because you have not seen Robert, William, or Moses. I would like you to know French, which you must, because you can turn around better, and then I guarantee you that you will pass your time pleasantly in Paris. I will introduce you to the first European talents; you will get to know these divas up close, which get smaller the closer you get to them. – I would like to give you my ticket to the Conservatory concert today. This is one thing that would exceed your expectations. Non plus ultra orchestra. Today they are playing Beethoven's Symphony with Horas[!] and one of his quartets, played by a mass of all violins, violas and violoncelli of the Conservatory orchestra; nothing more than 50 violinists; – they repeat this quartet on demand. It was given last concert - you would think only four instruments play, but a violin as big as a castle, a viola as a bank, and a violoncella as a Lutheran church. Love me. I'm waiting for you. FF. Chopin. \r\n"
" was very pleased with your letter of the sixth day, my dear child; for I gather that, fortunately, you were not affected by the riots that took place and were caused by human monsters. Some newspapers claim that Poles took part in them, thus abusing their hospitality; Haven't they had enough of this madness? They've done so much here. I am convinced that there could not have been many, for who would be so mad as to share their subversive views. How lucky it is that the healthy part of the nation has prevailed and that peace has been restored. You, as an artist, must have temporarily lost the income you owe to your talent, but it cannot last long; the fine arts are always reborn as soon as peace returns. Tell me what the situation is and how your material affairs are. Has your favorite kept his word and paid you for your songs? Say what you want, but I don't approve of your aversion to certain people, I don't know what could have turned you off from them, and I don't like the word dung at all. But ultimately, you are at an age when a person should be able to reflect and consider, and not follow ""your own or others' whims."" I advise you to save as much as you can so that you don't end up penniless if you plan to visit other countries. Your Mother and I hug you with all our hearts Ch."
"[...] not only so far, but probably will continue to do so. The glasses haven't arrived yet; don't forget to write who you send them through and where we have to go to get them. Your linen would be very useful to us to wrap some wounds, however small they might seem, but too painful; as when your merciful heart softens greatly, I hope that, despite the announcement that you will bring it yourself, I will get it sooner. But besides pity, I know that it takes time and disposition; ah, I feel it strongly, because sometimes I am in similar troubles and now I have a few letters behind me, I have to get this burden off my head and heart, and I don't want to deal with it. Maybe we'll go to Mr. Michał's for a holiday. To Mr. Fryde. you can't, because he has already sold the Eagles, and to the second Mr. Fr. too far. The best way to corrupt people is most often to make them feel good; as the ore increases, the heart hardens and slowly turns into mineral or stone. However, I don't know if millions can change us; I would rather renounce them than subject myself to such cruel [...]"
"Mussye Mussye Fontana Site dante troa at the Caterers. I am sending you yesterday's note from Nat[alia] Komar. If you want, I'll wait for you at my place in the evening around 8 1/2; if not, write me a word so I know whether to wait. your FF. Ch. nb. If you think that you are asked to play, reject it. Primo, I doubt that they have been dancing since the day before (because I saw them) they wanted to; secundo, there will be me, Jeło[wicki] (probably) and Potocka - and you can have fun if you don't put some slits in your head without a wig [!] - After all, they won't shoot cannons in any salon, and they'll also make you dizzy - too early even though you are 10 years older than me. Carry a cartridge in your soul and weaken it, but let no one perceive it from the carrier."
Your Trios, my dear, are long overdue, and as I am gluttonous, I have absorbed your manuscripts into my repertoire. Your Concerto will be performed this month at the Conservatory competition by Adam's students - Miss Lyon plays it very well. Temptation, an opera-ballet by Halévy and Gide, has tempted none of those with good taste, for it is as uninteresting as your German Diet is out of the spirit of our century. Maurice has returned from London, where he went to stage Robert (which was unsuccessful) and has assured us that Moscheles and Field will be coming to Paris for the winter - here's the news I can share... Osborne has been in London for two months , Pixis in Boulogne, Kalkbrenner in Meudon, Rossini in Bordeaux. Everyone who knows you is waiting for you with open arms. Liszt wants to add two more words. Adieu, dear friend. Sincerely, F. Chopin. [Followed by Franz Liszt's addition.]
Beloved Compatriot Chopin. This Miss Segny from Lyon has come here, she hasn't heard of anyone here yet, and she's recommended to me. Heaven!! Play her a mazurka or whatever you want, and you will serve the one who greets you, your countryman and friend Norblin.
"Give it to Miss Ludwika C[hopinówny], who will probably guess who to give it to. In any case, find out about it from Mrs. C[hopin]. My most beloved life! Forgive me that you receive this piece of paper for your so kind letter, but you have already given me the right to deal with you with greater sincerity than ever before; that's why I know you won't pay attention to the paper. You brought me what I wanted! I have always loved you; you had a friend in me and be sure that today you will find in me such a boy as you should. If I could hug you on your wedding day as best man and see you at the altar, I would give half my life; but nothing of that, only to you, according to your wishes, I will send you a polonaise and a mazurka, so that you can jump and truly rejoice, because your souls can rejoice. I will not dwell on your heart or on hers, because it is not proper, brother, but you will not believe how much it bothered me that it has been delayed so far, and how happy I am that it will happen. May all the best happen to you. The sight of your happiness will be the happiness of our whole family. It is the beginning of blissful years after a long string of misfortunes. Give me your hand and mouth. - Love me. Your most sincere Fryc. My life, once again forgive me, my lover, that I am not writing you a long letter. It is possible to sin in the hope of mercy, but we understand each other not from today or yesterday. Again: love me as I love you."
Come alone and bring me the Hungarian by force in the evening. Freppa will sing, and maybe we'll jump. Grab Sadowski there by the [butt], but it must be there. Go to the club and recruit General Skarżyński.
" see from your last letter, my dear, that you have at last met all the leading artists in the art you practice, and that you can compete with them. I was sure of it knowing your diligence. I am also glad that, as I see, you live in the greatest harmony with them and, without arousing their jealousy, you force them to evaluate you as you deserve. Continue in this way, dear child, and you will be sought out for your good character as well as for your talent. You have described to us in detail your situation and what has happened to you since your last letter; I am grateful to You for this, because everything that concerns You concerns us deeply. You must have enjoyed Mayerberg's astonishment, as well as your appreciation of Field, whom you so ardently wanted to meet. I very much applaud the decision to publish your compositions, because many people hear about you without being able to know your compositions, and in fact they should be ahead of you wherever you intend to go. In addition, the income you will earn will give you a small fund, which will allow you to realize your intention to go to England next spring, where your works will already be known. I have no doubt that you will take advantage of the kindness of your admirers to give a concert that can be great and bring some income; you must strike the iron while it is hot and while you can do it. My child, I am telling you honestly, try to keep some money in reserve, especially in the times we live in. You know I had a job that earned me a decent living, and now, after more than twenty years of service to society, I'm on the verge of losing my second job. My age no longer allows me to grind the cobblestones and run after lessons, but I will not stop thanking Providence for giving me children who, I hope, will be able to suffice and deserve the respect of people. Your sister is getting married when you receive this letter, no doubt she will be married. God let her be happy! Mother, you know her tenderness, she does everything in our power to ensure that your sister has what is needed in such circumstances. They will be married where you were baptized, which is very pleasing to me, though in fact this journey, though short, does not suit me very well at this time of year; however, it will save your Mother a lot of trouble, because here, in order not to offend anyone, you would have to invite many acquaintances, who, after all, cannot be entertained with a glass of water. So, my children, you have spread around the world. Only Izabela will remain with us, but you will all be forever connected in the hearts of father and mother. Mother and I give you a very warm hug. Say hello to Mr. Méry. I was going to write to you and give your address to Monsieur Grégoire, but I went to him several times and did not find him. He must be in Paris now. He will certainly see Mr. Norblin, so I think that if you wanted to send some small compositions to your sisters, he could undertake to bring them. You'd have to talk to Mr. Norblin about that. When you have some time, you should send a word of reply to your friends in Berlin. You know how the Dziewanowskis are kind to us and how they favor you. I was supposed to post this letter yesterday, but work prevented me from going to the post office early enough. Be healthy and avoid sitting too long in the evenings, it takes away your ability to work, and I see from your letter that you have a lot of work. After the show, it wouldn't hurt if one of your friends put it in the newspaper, so your songs would be more sought after."
"Dear Fryderyk and dear friend! I am not writing to remind you of me, because I do not need it, always convincing myself of your dear memory from letters to your parents written. I am not writing to convince you that I too - although not with my real eyes - always see you in front of me and with you about Music, about its progress in general and about what may one day be its destiny as a language of feelings, etc., I talk. At the end I am not writing to tell you what our Fryderyk knows all too well, that I greatly respect him and love him very much, because he, as a Genius-man, deserves it from all who know how to do it; but that's why I'm writing because your friend Nowakowski demanded it, because I really would have so much to write that I don't know where to start, so much so that I wouldn't be able to satisfy myself - omne nimium vectitur in vicium [1] . However, I cannot keep silent about the fact that my work on the Metryonomy and Rhythm of the Polish language in three volumes (which includes my dissertation, partly known to you, on Melody) is already finished; but now it cannot be published, because in it, apart from the musical tendency, the most important role is played by nationality (which goes without saying), which - although the cleanest and most modestly dressed, is always beautiful - because of its charms, even in a veil at a public market she is not allowed. The content of the third volume is a close connection of poetry with music, and in order to convince you - sapienti pauca - that working out my thoughts in this regard could also be useful not only to composers of Polish, but also German, French and Italian opera, I quote one short passage from the preface "" ...considering all this, it must be admitted that the Opera as a spectacle, in a particularly aesthetic respect, awaiting its perfection, is not yet at the level of its true grandeur. It can be led to it by poets and composers of all civilized nations by common endeavor. It's a pity that I can't talk and confer with you and the likes of Mickiewicz! Well, here you are - I had nothing to write and I couldn't write, and yet the greater half of the paper for the letter was full. And it will always be like this - whoever stays with whom becomes so. And you, from a few notes of the idea of the devil's choir, casually (however, beautiful eyes asked you for it) developed Angel Songs. Too much, I must finish, because I only mentioned the name of the poet - Mickiewicz, and Hell with these fears, and Heaven with hopes are before my eyes, so that I could forget that I am on earth if I were not in Warsaw. Be healthy and be convinced that no one, except for your family - not yet knowing the person with whom you will join through your beloved Ludwika, your sister, and therefore I cannot say anything about this one yet - can love and respect you more than your friend Józef Elsner. And Monsieur Lesieur Kalkbrenner Norblin Olszewski. Did Orłowski receive released music? Maybe he hasn't returned to Paris yet. My respects to all my friends... My wife, together with my daughter, Emilia Nidecka née Elsner, now send their beautiful bows. And my son-in-law Ludwik (you know) his respects. [1] Omne... vicium (Latin) - any excess leads to evil. \r\n"
The day of fulfillment of our happiness is the 28th of this month Brochów and Żelazowa Wola are to be memorable places of our lives. Mrs. Jędrzejewicz will describe the details of this festival, and if she allows me, I will assign myself to her letter. I kiss you heartily, asking you to love me now, at least in part, as you love Miss L[udwika]. Sincerely attached Jedrz.
"Dear Domuś! If I had a friend who a few years ago (a friend with a big, crooked nose, because we are not talking about others here), i.e. who used to fart with me in Szafami a few years ago, who always loved me with conviction, and my father and aunt from love with gratitude, and if he left the country and did not write a word to me, I would think the worst of him, and even if he later cried and begged, I would not forgive him - and I, Fryc, still have so much on my face that I defend my negligence [1 ] and after sitting silently for a long time, I speak like a top that will pop its head out of the water when no one asks it. But I will not try to explicate, I prefer to admit my guilt, which may seem greater from a distance than up close, because I am torn on all sides. I entered the first societies, I sit among ambassadors, princes, ministers; and I don't even know how, because I didn't climb alone. For me it is the most necessary thing today, because that is where good taste comes from; you immediately have a greater talent, if you were heard in the English or Austrian embassy, you immediately play better if the Duchess of Vaudemont protected you. Protects - I can't write because the woman died a week ago; and she was a lady like the late Zielonkowa or the castellan Połaniecka, with whom the court frequented, who did much good, sheltered many aristocrats during the first revolution; the first of the ladies after Juliet's days was at the court, the last from the elder Montmorency's family (owner of a lot of white and black females, canaries, parrots and the owner of the funniest monkey in the great world, who bit other contesses at her evenings). I have friendship and respect between artists; I wouldn't write this until after at least a year of staying here, but it is a sign of respect that people with a huge reputation dedicate their compositions to me before I do to them; and so Pixis attributed his latest Variations with a military band to me, secondly, they compose variations on my theme, the Kalkbrermer of my mazurka has gone mad. Students of the Conservatory, students of Moscheles, Herz, Kalkbrenner, in short, finished artists, take lessons from me, put my name under Fieldowski's, in a word, to make me even dumber, I would think that I am at the top of my career; meanwhile, I see how much I still have ahead of me, and I see it all the more because I live closely with the first artists and I know what everyone lacks. But I'm ashamed of all the rubbish I wrote; I boasted like a child, or like one who has his cap on and defends himself in advance; I would erase it, but I don't have time to write another page; anyway, maybe you haven't forgotten my character yet, then you will remember what was like yesterday, with the difference that with one favorite, the other does not want to grow and does not want to. – I have five lessons to give today; you think I will make a fortune; a convertible costs more and white gloves without which you would not have a good tone. ""I love Carlists, I hate Filipinos, I am a revolutionary myself, so I don't care about money, only friendship, for which I beg and ask you."" FF Chopin. [1] Negligence (from French négligence) – negligence, tardiness."
 was informed about my election as an associate member, which the Literary Society honored me, on the 15th of May. The honor of entering their group will be an incentive for me to new works corresponding to the purpose of the Society, to which I am ready to serve with all my strength. I remain with deep respect a true Servant of FF. Chopin born on Born on March 1, 1810 in the village of Żelazowa Wola in the Masovian Voivodeship.
"My dear child, your letter of February 27. has come and has given us no less pleasure than the previous ones, for nothing can interest us more than You. Everything you write to us about how you spend your time reassures us about your needs, but, my dear, a penny for a rainy day - I keep recommending it to you - will reassure us doubly. As for your health, I am pleased to know that you understand its value well enough to avoid anything that could be fatal to it. I tell you that too long evening parties eventually become tiresome, and you must have also noticed that you are less disposed to work on composition in the morning; I remember it was your favorite time. I feel perfectly well that the good reception you receive flatters you and allows you to make new acquaintances among outstanding people every day, but you should take care of your health above all, believe me. My child, this alone enables us to endure your absence with more patience, and praise be to God that the air of Paris serves you. I am pleased to see that you intend to give a concert in earnest, and you anticipate that it will be more profitable than last year's. But I also see that although the city is huge, it's not easy for you musicians to find a venue in Paris if you'll be forced to take the same hall as last year. May you encounter fewer obstacles, for, I confess to you, I am afraid of the envy of Kal[kbrenner], for whom competition is somewhat unexpected, it seems to me. Save it always. As for us, my child, we are quite well, thank God; we hold on as best we can. We always have a few boarders, but they are educated at home, so the teachers cost a lot, and there is only enough to live on. Since my classes across the street are still on hold and I'm staying at home, I feel far better, but I only have half of what I had until recently; but I am not troubled by it, our needs are small, our children are well, they can take care of themselves, and if I leave them nothing, they will know that it is not because I have not worked. So, I am, or rather we are satisfied and we hope to see you someday. This hope is very pleasant, and our desire is very strong; expecting that someday they will come true, we hug you very warmly, your good mother and I. Ch. Give your best regards to Nowakowski; try to help him as much as you can. Thousands of greetings to Méry. By the way, you don't tell us if you finished your 3rd Concerto; I confess that I doubt it, and it would not be very painful to me, for it requires too much mental tension, and if you sleep little you are less of a temper, as I have already told you. Since you had no order, as in Vienna, for a certain person, you never mentioned him; do you not meet anyone from the house of those with whom you visit?"
"[...] about pleasant or unpleasant illusions of truth can provide. So my humor is intolerable to itself. I sit at home, in the morning I teach children, of whom I have four boys, of which I teach the smallest to play. What do you say? He is convinced that I can teach him a lot, because I want to and I know a lot; I give you proof of this truth; he asked me if you played better than me, and he did not want to convince himself of your superiority in any way, finally he said that he did not understand how you must play. He's a good boy! You write that you expect that I must play the second Nocturne quite well, and when this letter arrived I had not yet seen them; because Mr. Ł. says that you gave them to her, but she was so kind that she lent them to us a few days ago. So I play them every day with great delight; what if I win every note when without the soul with which you created them! “Miss Weinert's concert tonight. Miss Orłowska sings. – But, Sinosio [?], the good man got madness out of love. With a speedy treatment he came to himself; it's healed now, but you can expect it won't be for long. – Lorca was here yesterday [...]"
My dear friend, Please kindly come to me for a moment between 4 and 5 today to complete our 8 hands. I would be very much obliged to you! Yours faithfully, H. Herz.
" am very glad, my dear child, that you have a concert behind you, but I see that you could not count on it as a source of income when you are in need, because the costs equal the income; but if you are satisfied, we are also glad. However, I will not tire of telling you that until you try to put aside a few thousand francs, I will consider you pitiable, despite your talent and the flattery they bestow on you; Flattery is smoke, it won't help you when you need it. If, God forbid, ailments or illness forced you to stop your lessons, you are in danger of poverty abroad. This thought, I will admit, often torments me, because I see that you live from day to day and that you cannot afford even the shortest journey, even within the borders of the country in which you are staying. You wrote about a trip to England project, but for what? And to a country where there is such an unusual price? If you go on like this, I believe you will always be a Parisian. Don't think that I want you to be stingy, I just want you to be less indifferent about the future. As for the fact that the newspapers do not write about your progress, I assure you, dear child, that my ambition does not go so far, my main concern is that you have your livelihood; and the falsehood of Kal[kbrenner] - which is obvious, for I can see that he must have given you headaches more than once - worries me for your sake. I must admit that you have shown great honesty by dedicating something to him! I won't say I want to see him, but if he comes here, I can, however, not show it. Your Nocturnes and Mazurkas were reissued in Leipzig and sold out here in a few days. Jawurek told me that he started it too late. I heard from Mr. Walewski's cousins that he was to come here; if this is the case, take advantage and send a copy of your Concerto through him, if it is already printed. Izabela will try to play a few fragments of it for us. Ludwika doesn't have a piano yet, as I haven't been able to afford such an expense so far; I'm sorry to have to deny myself this, but ultimately it's not a misfortune. As far as our health is concerned, thank God we are doing quite well. Our resources are now very modest, but fortunately we know how to limit our needs and what we earn is enough for us. Izabela is with us and everywhere... [words illegible] about you and your sister; it anticipates our wishes in everything, which makes our solitary life more pleasant, and thanks to it it seems to us that we are all still together, even though You are not here. I told you what I feel and what I think; if you find anything in it that does not agree with your way of living and thinking, put it down to the excessive care of a father who loves you dearly. Your Mother hugs You tenderly. Ch."
"Dear Fryciu, it's the nicest thing for me to honor you with this name, because it reminds me of the moments when I played with you, enjoyed your gaiety. Today, deprived of the pleasure of listening to divine and delightful music, I live only by memories. You made me feel the harmony and beauty of the tones that miraculously emanated from under your fingers, so that I might suffer more from your distance. Hope, that deceptive dish that is enjoyed by all people in the world without exception, makes me fat and makes me expect to see each other again. Your old friend loves you, loves you tenderly and with the kind of respect and adoration your genius deserves. So remember yourself as others, at least for a while; it is not the noblest maxim, but it is necessary to secure one's own happiness; Without it, we would suffer greatly. I can't finish. I beseech Thee by everything, despise the vile, vile rag that is Brawach [?]; this man should be erased forever from the order of societies. Be well and love me. Anthony."
"[Today, for at least the twentieth time, we arrange a rendezvous, either at my place or here, with the intention of writing to you, and we are always surprised by a visit or some other unforeseen obstacle. I don't know if Chopin can explain us to you; in my opinion, we have gone beyond the limits of rudeness and lack of education to such an extent that no translations are possible or acceptable anymore. We heartily shared your sadness, and even more heartily wanted to be with you, to ease the bitterness in your heart as far as possible.] My predecessor expressed everything so well that I cannot add anything to explain in detail my carelessness or laziness or flu, or absentmindedness - whether, whether, whether... You know that I can express myself better verbally, so when I walk you down the boulevards late in the evening to your mother in the autumn, I will try to obtain His forgiveness. I write without knowing what my pen is scribbling, for at this moment Liszt plays my Etudes and takes me beyond the sphere of reasonable thought. I would like to steal from him the way of performing my own pieces. Of the Lord's friends who stayed in Paris, I often saw the Léo family and their circle this winter and spring. There were also evenings with certain Ambassadors, and there was not a single one where someone who was in Frankfurt was not mentioned. Mrs. Eichthal sends you thousands of kind words. Your departure saddened the Plater family; they asked me to express their sympathy to the Lord. [Mrs. Apponyi resented me very much for not taking the Lord to her before His departure; I hope you will remember your promise when you return. I can say the same to you about a lady who is not an ambassador. Do you know Chopin's wonderful Etudes?...] They are wonderful! and yet they will exist only as long as the Lord's do not appear [this is only the author's modesty!!!]. This is just malice on the part of the mentor - because to explain the whole thing to you better, I must add that he corrects my spelling mistakes [Mr. Marlet's method. You'll come back to us in September, won't you? Please try to inform us about the day of your arrival, because we have decided to give you a serenade (that is, cat music). A team of the capital's most outstanding artists – Mr. Franchomme (current), Mrs. Petzold and Abbé Bardin, the coryphaeus from rue d'Amboise (and other nearby), Maurice Schlesinger, uncles, aunts, brothers-in-law, sisters-in-law, etc., etc.] in the background, etc. Responsible publishers [ F. Liszt ], F. Chopin , [ Aug. Franchomme ] By the way, I met Heine yesterday, who recommended me to greet you cordially, cordially. Again, by the way, spare me all these ""Lord"" - I am asking you to forgive me. When you have a spare moment, send us some messages about yourself - they are very dear to us. Paris, rue de la Chaussée d'Antin No. 5. I am now living in Franck's apartment - he has gone to London and Berlin. I feel perfectly well within these walls, where we used to meet so often. Berlioz tells you to hug you. As for old Baillot, he is now in Switzerland, in Geneva, so you can guess that I cannot send you the Bach Concerto."
Monsieur Franchoimme would like to come and greet his friend Baudiot, née Cap (to La Boule d'Or).
"Dear friend. It would be useless to justify my silence. If only my thoughts could transfer themselves to the post office, without putting them on paper! ""Besides, you know me too well not to know that, unfortunately, I never do what I'm supposed to do."" I traveled very comfortably (except for one unpleasant episode: it was caused by a certain odorous gentleman who was going to Chartres; he boarded unexpectedly in the middle of the night). I found more work in Paris than I had before I left; this will probably prevent me from coming to you in Côteau! Coteau! oh Coteau! My child, tell the whole house of Côteau that I will never forget my stay in Touraine, that so much kindness is due to eternal gratitude. They say I'm fat, that I look good - I feel great thanks to my neighbors at dinner, who gave me real motherly care. When I think about it, it all seems like such a nice dream that I would like to dream more... And the peasants of Pornice! and the flour! or rather your graceful nose... which you had to plunge into...? A very interesting visit was interrupted by a letter begun three days ago; I can finish today. Hiller tells you to kiss you, and Maurice, and everyone. I took your note to your brother, but I did not find him at home. Paër, whom I saw a few days ago, told me about your return. Come to us fat and healthy like me. Once again, lots of cordiality to the esteemed Forest family. I have neither words nor the ability to express all that I feel for them. Forgive me. Shake my hand - I pat you on the shoulder - I hug you - I kiss you. Goodbye, my dear! F. Ch. Hoffmann, fat Hoffmann and slim Smitkowski also kiss you."
"My dear child. Your letter of the 24th gave me a pleasant surprise: it was delivered to me on my name day, just as I was leaving to baptize your nephew. I am grateful to you for remembering me, I thought a lot about you and about those times when on that day I had all of you gathered around me. If I no longer have this pleasure, I have the consolation that you have all fulfilled my wishes, i.e. you follow the path of virtue and are able to be self-sufficient; may you be happy! The opinion that you are trying to form about yourself will inevitably provide you with pleasant considerations in the company and the respect of experts. I see from your letters that you are very busy; at your age, work is necessary, idleness is sometimes harmful, but it would be wrong if you were to be overloaded with work, because you should think about your health, and your activities are not mechanical after all. I don't blame you for looking for amusement in the great world, but I am afraid that these evenings are too long, and you need rest. I thank Providence a thousand times that it has deigned to keep you healthy so far, may it always watch over you. You mentioned travel, but one should enjoy the beautiful days of summer or stick to the proverb you quoted in your last letter. Many people should stick to it, both for their own benefit and for the benefit of others. But it seems to man that he is well everywhere where he is not; I'm not saying this to you, because I think you realize how lucky you are in your art, and how unique your conditions are to cultivate it. Here there are plenty of professors giving music lessons, and I recently saw in a sheet music store that waltzes, polonaises, works of great popularity are in great demand; the shorter they are, the more fashionable they are. However, there are people who want to own your compositions; I don't know if they play them, so you wouldn't find anything that meets your expectations. On this I conclude, and I report to you that, thanks to God, we are quite well, that we are holding on as best we can, that so far we do not feel want, that we are satisfied with our modest conditions, because we know how to limit our needs. Titus is here, I saw him yesterday; he promised me to write to you, but since you have not heard from us for a long time, I do not want to miss this mail, for fear that you may be anxious about us. Both Mother and I kiss you and hold you close to our hearts. Chopin. Thousands of beautiful greetings to Mr. Hoffmann; I'm so glad you're together! Speaking of Marcelina, she won't go to Paris anymore."
Chopin's friend. Dear Chopin. I am physically, morally and absolutely unable to leave the house this morning. Go to Nourrit, whom I warned yesterday, and explain to him. Addie, dear! FL
"My dear Fryderyk, we received a letter from you yesterday, just for the name day itself, we were very pleased with you, whose features are not as clear as in the miniature, which Jacques painted. Ludwika hasn't seen it yet, although we were all with them yesterday evening at the christening of little Henryś, whom Papa and Pruszakowa kept together, and Tabęcki and Krzysztofowiczowa kept until baptism. pretty kid; there were many guests in their little apartment, Tytus was there with his brother, both are in Warsaw; Titus will stay here for a long time, because his sister also came to the city for the winter. Mleczkowa bows to you and although she was happy with you painted the other day (because she was with her husband and mother as usual on the eve of her name day), she told you to write that she would prefer you to come. Her little Marynia is a pretty child. Louis looks better. She allowed herself to be painted with the baby for Papa's name day; it's similar, but not much, in my opinion, but Papa finds a great resemblance. Ziemięcki painted it, he offered himself. They live in friendship, so it was impossible to refuse. I will return this note with my own hand, but you will not receive an answer through us, and I am asking you, do not undertake any more, they will not even be able to take this as a bad thing. At that moment, Now[akowski] came and also finds you missing; although he knows it's you, he finds you resembling Reichstal. My dear, you will not receive a letter from Ludwika today, because after last night it is difficult; but we do not want to stop any longer so as not to make you restless, although in fact you have nothing to worry about us. But don't think we're having fun here; no, my dear, these are only extraordinary cases. My dear, I don't know what to write. Now[akowski] waits for the lesson, and the post office leaves. Mr. Michael arrived yesterday. Oh my dear Fryc, I'm learning etudes and the first solo from the Concerto, what do you say? That's too much audacity, isn't it? But all this in the hope that, just as you played the Concerto as a reward for Miss Lambert, that is, you listened to her, so will it happen to me. One must be stupid to create such illusions, but what would our life be without them! And I actually sigh all the time, sigh for this connection, as it used to be; but it is in vain, always only a fraction together perhaps! So that at least, when not under one roof, then at least in one place to live, not in such constant longing as now! Be well, I'm going to class. All your friends kiss you. P. Michal is doing well. Give a kiss to the loving Izabela. My dear, I am back to the letter again. You write about your love here. As long as you were silent, so was I; but I know and believe about them, and together with you I wonder how one can be so insensitive. The palace apparently had greater charms, but apparently you were doing bad business; but good taste, feel! Ah, feeling! but you can only see it in singing, you are the proof. In the meantime, give me a kiss, I'm in a hurry."
 am glad that I have come to the moment when they are writing to you, and that I have the opportunity to embrace you and remind myself of your memory and friendship. Mr. Michał is always the same, sincerely loving you and your whole family. When we see each other and hug, I will make up for your absence in Warsaw. Every time I come to her, I look at your miniature and greet it as if it were you yourself. I hug you cordially. m
 Your very attached Bartek wishes you health and prosperity.
"Sir, there has been an error in my wife's letter about the day; asked the Lord to come to us for dinner on Tuesday; meanwhile, she meant Thursday, or rather she didn't think about the fact that I was to speak at 7 p.m. at a political assembly on Tuesday. I am sorry, Dear Lord, for this, may the Lord be kind enough to read Thursday instead of Tuesday in my wife's card; I kindly ask you not to promise yourself elsewhere on this day. We are counting on the Lord and we are very much looking forward to his arrival. You know my respect and devotion; please accept the most sincere expressions of these feelings Ad. cremieux."
 Please, if you can, prescribe Prel for me. Ace, because I would like to give them to Perthuis. He's leaving tomorrow, and when are you? If you want to see me, then today around 8 - 9. \r\n
"My dear Chopin. Please explain me to Liszt [in orig. Listz] and these gentlemen; I will not be able to attend your dinner tonight; I have too much work. I think I shall see you and Liszt the day after tomorrow morning. Sincerely, H. Berlioz."
" Dear Sir, ""Revue Musicale"" is approaching its eighth year of existence. Despite the success that such a long existence states, I believe that I have much to do to further increase its popularity. Therefore, I am asking you for your gracious help by giving me a list of people from your surroundings who, in your opinion, would enjoy reading ""Revue"", so that I can send them a few specimen issues. Please accept my deepest respect. CF Fetis."
"Would you like to come to us next Thursday, February 20, for a modest family dinner, which would allow us to finally get to know you better and spend a few hours with Him? My friend Liszt undertakes to give you this note; he promises me in your name that the Lord will come with him. I hope that both my wife and I will not be deprived of this pleasure, which is a real celebration for us. Your devoted servant Ad. cremieux."
"My dear child. I was beginning to worry about you, as we did not receive your letter of the 7th until the 18th, but I can easily understand that your occupations prevented you from writing to us earlier. I don't know where you got the idea that I was sick? No, my dear, I believe I have written to you that our health is as good as can be at our age, and that we do not lose hope of seeing you some day; just respect yourself, do not overload with work, ceremonial visits and long evening parties. I know you're doing all this for a name and also for entertainment. I really regret that you don't have a good friend with you, because judging from what you tell us, you didn't hit the right spot previously, after all, you can't receive everyone in a smoky room, especially when you yourself - like yourself - don't smoke. It's sad to have no one to talk to. I enjoy what you write about your principles. Yes, my dear child, a young man can easily go astray if he does not watch over himself. It may happen that your talent and your kindness in dealing with someone will impress; avoid any false step at your age, do not get involved in any intrigue, it could expose you to a lot of annoyance. Finally, always be cautious and give no cause for gossip; you know this so-called great world, which is very small when seen close up, but one must take it as it is and keep silent. ""But let's talk about something else."" Your elder sister is content and happy, a beautiful baby has consolidated the relationship between her and her husband. The younger, perhaps, will not stay with us for long. Your friend Barci[inski] proposed for her and got our permission. Dear child, may she be as happy as she deserves and as we desire. And how are things going for you, my child? Can you put down a few pennies (it's just my usual song)? Do not miss any opportunity, listen to me, save your fund slowly, but I would advise you to put it in papers that you could realize at any time. What are you thinking of doing during the summer? are you going to take a little trip around Germany, as you have been advised, or will you rather stay quietly in Paris if you don't miss your lessons? Admittedly, to give German critics an incentive, it would be nice if they could hear your works performed by you yourself, and perhaps you would recoup your travel expenses. I give you no advice on this matter, you have enough sense to do the right thing. Brykczyński has not yet received his books and has no information about them, he does not know what happened to them. Try to find out about them. - My dear, do not spare the fee for letters, try to make up for your absence as often as you can; when you tell us about yourself, it seems to us that we are talking to you, and the little details you send us please both us and all those who wish you well. Your friend Titus is at home in the country, I think I sent you his address. Old Jawurek is dangerously ill; Elsner gives lessons having worked all his life. Ludwika's intentions are very beautiful but very difficult to implement in such a short time as she imagines. Ultimately, all of this should prove to you that we think of you, that we love you with all our hearts. Your loving mother and I give you a very warm hug Ch. If - as a lonely person - you share your apartment with someone, choose well and be sure of his conduct, because everywhere you can meet a wolf in lamb's skin, especially in the age in which we live."
My life! I'm sending you Schunke's invitations – and I'm asking myself if I lent Witwicki's songs to you. I can't find them. I am asking you about them. Today, i.e. v. FF. Chopin. \r\n
"Finally, after great trouble that Fryderyk does not write, that there is no letter, we received it yesterday - with what shouts of joy, you can easily understand, knowing how much we love you. Oh my dear, in fact your letters enliven the whole house: Papa contented, Mama calmer, we are happier, hence the good humor and pleasure (however rare for us) after all, we can feel it. So you will now make a journey, which will take as many miles and time as would be necessary for us; but we are still, although close, always you. We are constantly thinking that it is possible to see you, that at least you could go somewhere with your parents, because really the only thing that would be happiness for them! Nothing like it in the world, and so it may happen, but when? I read Kallert's answer to Rellstab's review; I really liked her. He has described you from childhood as if he knew your relationship best; he lied nothing, he writes very flatteringly about character (albeit the truth), he attributes your talent and mind to your moral education, etc. Finally, he put a footnote that he read your answer in ""Iris"", and swears that it was not you who wrote; for then he would regret not that he stood up for you, but what he had said above about your character. I am glad that the Germans already view talent from this point of view; I see progress in everything. Kallert, you see, a generally educated man, understands you, understands the spirit of the age. If you haven't read it, give it a try, it's worth it. But what am I writing to you about it when you have so many others to read that we cannot have. I'm still learning your compositions here. I played a duet with the cello; we liked it, but that's just the way it is. Now[akowski] brought that Herman, which you may remember from the Moriols, and he, content that it was yours, learned it and we tried it. We'll have a ball like this one more time, and we'll be glad, though it's a clumsy imitation of what's supposed to be! nb. no one listens to it, only we who love you; for I am not learning your things for whom, or rather not for showing off, but that you are my brother and that nothing suits my soul as much as you. I am now learning the Ludowika Variations for Miss Horsford, and I like them very much. You won't believe, my dear, how fun it is for us to buy your compositions, or rather ask for them in the store. Ludwika has 3 second Nocturnes, beautiful, wonderful. But, your etched portrait sells for PLN 10 with us. Yesterday, Henry was vaccinated with smallpox. Today Ludwika is supposed to send a note, but if she didn't, don't worry, because Mom was with her yesterday, she and the little one are healthy; only that naturally she might not have had time, the more so that the little one is not caressed... The Lewockis, healthy, bow to Mr. Stefan, and so do we; The first to send their bows to the Puzyns."
"My dear child. We have just received your letter of the 13th, and we have been awaiting it impatiently, since it was delayed compared to the previous ones. I won't tell you how pleased he was to bring the news that you were well and that you were still working to make a name for yourself; you can easily imagine our joy knowing how much we love you. You mention a project to take a little trip to have some fun; I applaud this intention, for you will find an opportunity to make yourself heard and to gain more esteem for your compositions in countries where the piano is the favorite instrument; but since this journey will involve some expenses, and you [words illegible] lessons, perhaps, if you had the opportunity to give a concert, you would have something to cover the cost of the trip. Since you yourself confess that you are sometimes absent-minded, I may do well to remind you not to neglect to provide your passport with all the necessary formalities, lest you be exposed to any trouble, although your name is already known, for German papers, as well as other they talked about him; among others - a certain Berlin magazine, in which they write about you both good and bad. I am very glad that you have accidentally met a friend of your fiercest critic and that he is going to write and contradict what has been said about you and your compositions; it was even claimed that you replied with a letter written in very poor German and with a delicacy equal to your style; it seems that these gentlemen do not know that you received a careful upbringing and that you were engaged not only in reading notes. I am completely convinced that you will brush this matter off with complete silence, your works speak for you quite loudly; if others want to imitate you despite the old routine they are used to - it means a lot. Try and continue, my dear, push these Zoils to the extreme, proving to them that the fine arts have no limits. By the way, since I was told these days that Madame Guérin was leaving soon for Paris, I went to her and we talked about you; you can easily imagine how pleasant this conversation was for me; she will be able to tell you that she has seen me in as good health as my age permits. Your mother, thank God, is doing well too; Your sisters and their families have nothing to complain about either, so it's a great celebration for us to hear from you. I hasten to write to you, so that you may receive this letter before your departure and that you may write back to us from Paris; when you arrive at the end of your journey, do not hesitate to write us about yourself: this is what interests us and makes it easier to bear your absence. We embrace you very cordially and recommend that you take a little rest during your journey, stopping at least for a few days in some major city. Once again we hug you and ask you to spare yourself. Ch."
"My Chopin. An expedition is being arranged to visit us, in Montmartre, via St. Denis No. 10; I hope Hiller, Liszt and Devigny will arrive accompanied by Chopin. Mighty buffoonery. So much the worse. HB"
 Gracious Lady. Today I am like steam on our steamboat - I dissolve in the air and I feel that one part of me goes to my homeland, to mine, the other to Paris, to you. She wanders respectfully, finds the Lady in Her study and makes a beautiful bow. Ferdynand is healthy, he looks attractive - it is a pity that there is no more space for me to write everything that I will have the honor to tell. Lady's servant.
"Very, very, very urgent. Dear friend. It is absolutely necessary that you go today to the ladies of the Forest, whom you will find all day until six o'clock at the Hotel de Boulogne, rue Poissonni?re. Miss Adela thinks you don't want to give her lessons, and there is talk of going to Tours at once; since the purpose of their journey was you alone, you will not wish to cause them such acute annoyance and deprive someone who loves you of the happiness of seeing this dear family at the appointed time. I count on your friendship, just as you should count on the friendship of your August Franchomme."
"Dear Felus! You must have thought to yourself: Fryc moaned that neither me nor Marysia wrote back. You remember that I always did everything too late. I went to Miss Fanche too late. So I had to wait for the good old Wolf to leave. If it wasn't for the fact that I just came back from the Rhine and that I have a job that I can't give up now, I would go to Geneva at this moment to thank you and accept your Dear Mother's invitation. But a harsh fate, in a word, none of that. Your sister was kind enough to send me her composition. This made me inexpressibly happy, and the very same evening I improvised in one of the local salons on the pretty theme of that Marynia, with whom we used to chase after the rooms in the Pszenny house in the old days... And today! Je prends la liberté d'envoyer ? mon estimable coll?gue Mlle Marie une petite valse que je viens de publier. [1] May he give a hundredth part of the pleasure I experienced when I received the variations. I finish by thanking you most sincerely for your Mother's gracious memory for her and faithful servant, in whom also some Kuyavian blood flows. Hug dear Antek. Suffocate Kazia from tendresses [2] if you can, and what about Miss Maria, then bow very elegantly, with respect. Be amazed and say to yourself quietly: ""My God, how it has grown!""... F. Chopin. [1] Je prends... de publier. – I take the liberty of sending to my esteemed colleague, Miss Maria, a waltz that I recently published. [2] Tendressy (from French tendresse) – tenderness."
"Dearest Fritz. It's nice to see that people love you; let people put me another one like this to this day at your age. Let only health serve you; I only wish you that, nothing else. You think very well that next year you will see your parents, it would be really worth it for them, if it could be done anyway, to give them this pleasure. Piotr Lebrun is going to Paris, maybe he already is; he will probably be with you, because your address was sent to him by the Tomasz family. Even though you do not need to recommend politeness, remember him there, despite the good reception to which you are already accustomed, and also show him where, if he wants, etc. Anyway, you understand, I would like him to send another thunderous letter praising you to them. Mleczkowa is worried because her little one has died; terrible grief for the whole family. The boy died in Dresden, but they brought the body here. Oh mister michael! He ended up differently than we thought. All life was honest, though stupid, but fair; it seemed that he was our friend, it seemed otherwise, or perhaps madness can be assumed. He wrote the will and the most stupid dissertation in the world, which has neither sense nor connection, it is more like stupid and it pains me that it came to light to people, because he was worth another opinion. In his will, he leaves the village to a complete stranger, not a word about his brother, sister, or about Papa's debt, which was up to 20,000, even more. Homeland bitten, we all bitten; first, that such a stupid end, and second, that such ingratitude. Anyway, Izabela will describe you more extensively; objections were made to the suitability. Oh, we never expected what he did: so attached, like a child, to mention. Adieu, my dear, I hug you warmly. My little boy is well. What does Méry do? He is rumored to be getting married; Lewocki told me that [illegible word] that they had not had anything from him for a long time. Adieu, be well. The most affectionate LJ"
"My dear child. We have received and read your letter of August 20 with the same pleasure that we experience whenever we receive messages from you; for what is more pleasant for us, for a tender mother and for me, than to see that you are doing well and that you deserve the respect of good people? So you already have your own furniture, it seems, even quite luxurious, but I understand that you could not do otherwise, because you give lessons at your place, and now - as all times - people judge a man by appearances. However, my dear, all is well, but in so far as; rather try to take advantage of the offer of the three bankers you mention, I see from them that they wish you well. I am very glad that Jaś is with you, I have always liked him, he is a brave boy, which is sufficiently proved by his conduct, because despite unfavorable circumstances he has won an honorable position; I thank him for remembering us amidst the pleasures of the evening you arranged at your house. I read the poems you were given and the analysis of your Waltz, and I, who do not dare to write poems and do not even try to do so, came to mind these words: When in the age of pleasure fortune smiles on you, Evaluate its favors and beware of changeability ; Don't be blinded by him, let your mind always protect you from poverty by tempering your inclinations. Since it seems that you will stay abroad for some time, I inform you, my child, that it was said in the French newspapers of June 11 that every Pole should apply for an extension of his passport. As you left before the disturbances and you took no part in them, I would be glad if you would make inquiries about this, which you can easily do at the embassy. I confess to you that I would not wish you to be counted negligently among the emigrants. Do not underestimate this, please, and tell me what will come of it; It'll be easy for you, you're so famous. As for Michał, he acted unworthily towards his own family and towards us. It is unworthy to feel sorry for him. He bequeathed everything to some young rascal, not to mention his poor sister or us, from whom he received so much good, who lent him as much as we could. Fryderyk is very much affected by this blow and feels our troubles. It is true that after all debts have been paid, unless they are questioned, there will be little left for this monster that has been able to creep into the mind of a man who, by his death, has become unworthy of mourning. I have taken all the steps I have seen fit, but I do not know what will come of it, in any case there will be some loss, for I have no proof of all that I have borrowed. It's a painful lesson that, unfortunately, you can't trust anyone. Do not think, my dear, that I am so worried that my health will suffer; no, I want to maintain them in order to enjoy the sight of my children living in prosperity for as long as possible and to receive such nice proofs of their attachment. I am informing you that Łusia's grandfather visited us in those days to ask if you had not written about her in your letter and if she was going to return. He told me that he had written to her through a French woman who had gone from here to Paris to fetch her daughter, and that if her father would permit, she might take advantage of the opportunity. Try to see her and write us a few words about it to report it to grandfather, who seems to love his granddaughter very much. Miss Małgorzata also visited us recently. Dr. Lebrun was just telling us that he hoped his brother, who had spent some time studying painting in Italy, would soon be in Paris if he wasn't already there. Since you know many outstanding artists, we would be grateful if you could introduce him to them. We sent Hoffmann to mother; they went to the countryside for a short time. He would do well to write to his mother, who has not received the letter and is very concerned, as she recently said; we will be sure to let her know what you tell us as soon as she returns. We hug you with all our hearts. Ch."
"Both Papa and Ludwika have already written, and I, using the empty space, although in an untidy format, am writing to my nephew, whom I love more than my life. Because how not to love. Everyone loves you; but nb. I love you not only because you are a man in the world, because although many people live in the world, there are few of them on earth. I am truly happy to have such a sister and brother; one at a time, but also really worth something. I regret, I always regret that you do not know Ludwika today as a woman in society who already has a certain function, that is, wife and mother; your attachment to her would undoubtedly increase, because it is difficult to know her and every day not to love her more, not to value her soul! Mrs. L. asked me if Mr. Fry[deryk] received a letter, one from Krakow, the other from Salzbrunn, and if Miss Dumas is alive, because we must doubt it, having not had a sign of life from her for 4 months, let her report to pp. Malet of the brothers, and at least let us know that she was with them” – these are the words that I faithfully crossed out. I thank you for the cadeau [1] that goes to me; thank you very much for remembering me. Next month, but I don't know which one yet, I will move to Elektoralna St., far from my parents... [1] Cadeau - a gift."
Dear Friend! Everything I read, what I hear about our beloved Fryderyk fills my heart with joy, but forgive my sincerity - this is not enough for me so far, for me who was your undeserved and very happy teacher of musical harmony and counterpoint, and who will always be your true friend and admirer. Walking still in hac lachrymarum valle [1], I would like to see the opera of your composition not only to increase your fame, but also for the benefit that your - such a composition of musical craftsmanship can bring in general, and in particular when the subject of the opera will be used in the history of the very Polish . I don't say too much here - first, you know me that I can't flatter, secondly, I know (apart from your Genius) your disposition, that's what the critic of your Mazurkas mentioned. Only in the opera can he show himself in the true light and receive immortal life. Ein Thonstück auf dem Clavier (sagt Urban) verhält sich gegen ein solches für dem Gesang, oder andere Instrumente wie der Kupferstich zu dem, Gemälde . [2] This sentence is always very accurate, although some piano compositions - especially yours - and performed by you, may be considered as illuminated engravings. It's a pity that I can't see you, that we can't talk to each other - I would still have much and much more to say. Finally, that I could verbally thank you for your gift so dear to me, I would prefer at this moment to be a bird to see you in your Olympic dwelling - which Parisians consider a swallow's nest - I believe because they love you as we do. Be healthy and love me as I love you. I am and will always be your true and wish. friend Józef Elsner. [1] In hac... valle (Latin) - in this vale of tears. [2] Ein Thonstück... Gemälde (German) – the ratio of a musical piece for piano (according to Urban) to a piece for other instruments or a piece for singing is the same as that of a copperplate to a painting.
My dear Chopin. We haven't seen the Lord for a long time. The countless pleasures and amusements of Paris make you forget your old friends. So please come to us tomorrow for lunch, you will meet Liszt and some other friends who, like us, will be very pleased to see you. Addio. Fred. Kalkbrenner.
 Monsieur! The enclosed letter was brought to me by a Frenchman from Bourges who urged me to unseal it. I did it more to find out who it was written to, because I couldn't find out anything from the address. After reading it, I see that to you, and sending such a donor, who, as Colonel Janowicz writes, is our special friend, I recommend your kindness. Respect and greetings Dwernicki General.
"Sir! I have come to invite you, if it would please Him, to a performance of Clothilde at the French Theatre; my son will accompany you. He would expect you at his place at three-quarters to 6. In case you have already arranged your evening otherwise, please let him know by 5 o'clock at the latest. Adieu. Goodbye Anna Liszt."
"My dear child. I don't know what to think of you. It has been two weeks since the day we should have received your letter as usual, and we are very concerned, all the more so since you have not mentioned any travel or other impediment that would prevent you from writing to us at the usual time. Think, my dear, how lonely your mother and I are now; Your sisters are married - although they live in the same city, they are no longer with us, and although we see them almost every day, our house is very empty. So you can imagine how much we think about you and how much we care about news about your health. I confess to you that until I receive your letter, I will not stop worrying. I beseech You, my dear child, do not keep us waiting too long, it is too painful for people of our age and for hearts that love You dearly. If you ever run out of time to pick up a pen, have a good friend with you, tell him to write, and just sign the letter; whatever befalls you, whatever your loss, don't hide anything from us, for your silence is quite disturbing to us. We thought of you fondly on Izabela's wedding day, how we longed to see you among us! It was on this very day that we expected a letter from you, for that was the time it took for the reply to our last letter to arrive. From now on we eagerly await each post, but in vain. I finish and hug you with all my heart. Your mother cradles you to her breast. Ch. I met M. Ledoux yesterday; sends you greetings. By the way, hug Jaś, tell him a thousand cordiality from me; do not spare him, let him write when you do not have time; I think he'd be happy to do that. And if, unfortunately, the reason for his silence was some illness, I beseech him not to leave You for a moment. Many greetings also to Hoffmann, your good neighbor."
Have you completely forgotten about me? I do not want to think so, and above all I want to hope that the certainty of giving me very great pleasure will induce the Lord to find a quarter of an hour some evening to give me. I never go out in the evening, and I would be very grateful if a good thought would keep you at 39 rue Godot in one of those moments when we are not scrupulous about time. Goodbye sir, I hope goodbye, and soon. Countess d'Agoult.
My dear friend! Our Wednesday dinner won't be until next Sunday because Baillot has to play at the Tuileries. I hope we will all meet that day, but it would give me immense pleasure [example of music] if you would like to come over for dinner tomorrow, they will be alone - I'm counting on this token of friendship, otherwise I would hang myself tomorrow night, unable to go to the opera. Goodbye, my pearl, my jewel, my heart's adoration. Your Ferdinand Hiller. \r\n
"My dearest Fritz. You can judge from Papa's letter that he is in good health and is often in a good mood; It is enough to think of you to brighten up the forehead in nudots with children, because there is God's grace for them, but also for their inseparable companions, laziness and pranks, there is no shortage, which may not always amuse parents. At least they're healthy, and I don't think you'd find them changed. I will confess frankly that you have irritated Papa's self-love a little by astonishing that he plays the violin; it even appears in his footnote, because not only did he order us to make this accusation, but he himself could not refrain from expressing his grief to you. We laugh sometimes, if not rarely. I would like you to witness these concerts, where Żywny holds the lead on the piano, often improvising lively dances; then Papa leads the violin, Barc[iński] second, Grandma sings, and the little boy, beating the beat with his head and hand, joins Malbruk in the lower third. But! Waluś got married, and gradually, when he has children, the elder one has as many more of them as he was years ahead of his brother in this profession. The old ones are always brass, benefactor, and with kukardki. Cute reviews; you can see how they buy you up when we get the Leipzig edition of sheet music here. Your Mazurka, the third part of Bam bum bum (NB, I think it makes a sensation here, especially performed in the ""Rozmaitości"" theater by the whole orchestra), it was played at the Zamoyskis' ball throughout the evening, and Bar., who there he heard him, says that they were immensely pleased to dance with him. What do you say that they profane you so; because it's actually more of a mazurka to listen to. Tymowski, being at a ball at the Zamoyskis', when many ladies expressed a desire to have this Mazurka, took it from the orchestra and gave it to Klukowski to reprint it, and now it can be heard everywhere; is favorite [1]. What do you say to the fact that one evening when I was at Mr. Lebruns, I had to profane you. [Popisek] By the way, you didn't have to ask Mr. Piotr for dinner yet, because you didn't write anything about him, and the idea was nice, in the right spirit. [Continuation of the letter] They asked me if I wasn't playing your perfect Mazurka, and thinking about you, seeing you twiddling your paw with dissatisfaction (because it seems to me that you wrote it for listening), I played it for the dance with the approval of the dancers. My dear, tell me and write whether you wrote it in your spirit for dancing; maybe we misunderstood you - the one who sent something else during Méry's stay here. What is he doing? Bow to him for us. Don't think we're dancing here, we're not in the mood for that; sometimes you go to friends for an evening out, but more for convention and living with people like fun. U pp. There are dancing Thursdays in Frydrychów; we were there once, we are going next Thursday (sweet!); I would like to know what row of evenings you would place them in. P. Fry[deryk Skarbek] is always one, he likes to read or listen to your letters, calling you happy. Weltz marries Miss Chełmicka, whose father lives even further away than Kostuś Łusi. A young and pretty maiden; wedding on the 18th of the month, on the very day when our drum turns one and a half years old. I strongly believe that Matuszyński has to dismantle the German cottage, I'm surprised that he could think that a durable building could be made of that material. I saw Niesies[ki] after four years of not seeing him. always one; he was asking about you. He has even less hair, a face more like a non-face, because he has grown fat; he has not yet married, for his mistress has died, and he is always the same, sometimes smiling. He is kind, however, and it is difficult to blame him for what he is not guilty of, that sometimes his heart aches; because you know that he always suffered from heartache. He asked about you Działo, always pleasant, it's not hard to find similar people here. I hope that Warsaw does not dismiss youth comme il faut. How many times do I think of you in various ways, how many times am I angry that this is the only way we can talk to each other! I don't know, it will be more like crazy joy, like the furor of the strongest variations, like we will when we see you. Looking forward to that too! I'll tell you everything when I see her; we rarely see each other, because we live far away, but I would like to be alone more often, because she is a good creature. And what did Mrs. Matula say about those gifts, something he sent back? Mom's ring is lovely; explained that the diamond is you and the two of us on the side. At the moment they play whist: Papa, Ży., Bar. and eat. – Matt. bow pretty; let him remember to take advantage of time and circumstances, to distinguish himself from the bunglers of his trade when he returns. I'm not moving to the other side so as not to take Isabella's paper. Be healthy, love us and be happy! Husband hugs you from the soul, heart. [The other half of the sheet, with Izabela's letter, cut off.] [1] Favorite (French) - favourite."
" delayed writing to you, my dear child, because I knew that you had already heard about us from the Bar[cińskis]. Your last letter, which we read a week ago in the family, because you must know that on holidays and Sundays we all gather; well, your last letter gave us a pleasure that you can easily imagine, knowing how much we love you. The journal entry you sent us is very flattering, and we have enough self-love to believe that there is nothing exaggerated in it; so you can hope that if you organize a concert, you will have many listeners. I am very grateful to your good friend - whom I love and greatly respect - that he keeps you at home sometimes in the evening; it is at least after work a moment of relaxation for you. But I see from your letter that you complain about your publishers; I know you: they take advantage of your trust, they know that you can't say no to anything, and if they managed to extort your word, they torment you because they get good at it by buying your works at a very low price, because you are not firm enough to know how to bargain . I think the best way not to put yourself at their mercy is not to make any deal until your manuscript is completely corrected and rewritten, to play excerpts from it to excite their greed - the more they will be afraid that you will send your pieces to Leipzig, where they beg for them, as your friend told me, who wrote to you about it; apparently the Germans like your compositions; in fact, you alone give them a job and something new. Enough about that; I will only add that I was genuinely surprised by your delight that I am playing the violin and your nephew Bob is beating the beat; don't you know it's a new melody from old times? I played it to you on the flute, you broke it when I gave it to you to play with. But enough about that; how's your business? Do you always have so many leeches? I think you have plenty of them, but remember my constant song: a penny for a rainy day; it seems to me that in order to be able to refuse, you would do well if you deposited something from your savings every month with Messrs. Eichthals, those good people about whom you tell us so much; having nothing on you, you could say no and slowly collect the fund; it is the only way out, and if you do not take it, my dear child, you will continue to live from day to day, and you are not always young. By the way, I saw Długosz, we talked about his instrument, what do you think about it? Do the piano manufacturers in Paris have something similar? Tell me what you think about it, because you alone know it well and know how to use it; it would be very easy to order such an instrument and send it to you in the summer. Barciński has correspondents in Gdańsk and Hamburg, others in Le Havre, and from there to Paris. This idea came to me and Nowakowski. The new thing pleases, but it should give some benefit. I'd just be afraid that it wouldn't bring too many interesting things to you and take up too much of your time. As for us, I can tell you, my dear, that, thank God, we are quite well for our age. I have a few more drums with me, and they often impatient me, but what can I do? One must live and work, such is man's destiny, and he who has not been able to put something away in his youth is free from all reproach and pushes his wheelbarrow. - He is happy even when - like us - he has children and has comfort from them. I don't know yet how we will spend our holidays, I will write you about it later; meanwhile we hug you with all our hearts, together with your good Mother. Tell your friend that I am grateful to him for his kind memory and for the trouble he took in picking up the pen. The story of the snuffbox surprised neither us nor Elsner, to whom we told it; the person in question is all too famous, a true son of his country, and cares for nothing but money. The anecdote from Caën amused us immensely, it is told very wittily. You don't mention the Moriolls at all, have you lost track of them? That's not nice of you, they were kind to you."
"Dear Raccoon! Yesterday your portrait was at Princess Czartoryska's, where there were many people. I liked it very much. And at the beginning of the work of our Kurowski, the Duchess is the first to be painted. And since your portrait must necessarily be framed before it must be entrusted to foreign hands, because even yesterday it was almost knocked down, I am sending it back to you today; but I will ask you for permission to frame it, because the Duchess wants to show it at the court. I hug you cordially, J. Bem."
"Dear Lord Frederick! Let me remind you of your memory. Already Feluś and Marynia accosted You; At that time, sparing your time, dear, and having nice news about you through them, I did not write anything, but today, having such a good opportunity through our compatriot P. Darowski, I am reporting to you, asking you to inform us about yourself and your people, because often you probably have news from your country. What are your good parents doing? sisters? Dziewanowski, who was here last summer, gave us some details about them. So we will not be satisfied with seeing P. Fryderyk here? I myself do not know how long I will stay here, but I think that before I leave these parts, I will first visit Paris, and there will be people of interest to me. Forgive me, Dear Mr. Fryderyk, that I will ask you for a collection of autographs of famous people with whom (comme de raison [1]) you live. A Pole, a Frenchman, a German, etc., it doesn't matter, even a Jew with a beard, as it is with us, if only he's worth it, please collect and send it, and I'll be incredibly grateful to you; and above all keep us your friendship, which you have long had. Wodzińska. [1] Comme de raison (French) - goes without saying. \r\n"
"Dear Chopinet. The Lord promised me that once, and I wish very much that the Lord would come to me for dinner at 6 o'clock, from tomorrow, that is from Thursday, next week; on the first Thursday of Lent. I am to read to Victor Hugo and Lamartine something or other of my journey; there will be a few more people, 10 to 12 in total, and if the Lord will listen to me - provided that at the end of the evening I too can hear you in turn - I will be very happy, because I am inconsolable that although I still think about you and wish I have never had the opportunity to hear Him. This reading will perhaps interest you less than before, although the subject is beautiful; I found my father's diplomatic correspondence in Berlin, dated 1792, and on occasion I tell of his death and quote amazing facts from my mother's life. I hope that nothing will prevent you from finding yourself among friendly listeners; you are one of the friends you love, remember that. Goodbye, please, Lord, give me a yes or no so that I know what to count on. The kind of friendship you have with the friends you love. A. de Custine."
"Dearest Mr. F. Chopin. Wishing you the best of health, I have the honor to send you this letter via; Mr Edward Wolff. I recommend it to your precious friendship. Your whole family and I had the pleasure of hearing Him at his concert - and at the same time hearing the Adagio and Rondo from the Lord's Concerto, which are the most pleasant pieces that awakened memories of you in us. May God grant you every success. We are all healthy and would like to see you at least once more, meanwhile I send you my heartfelt kisses through Mr. Edward Wolff and recommend myself to your dear friendship, remaining also his faithful friend. Wojciech Zywny. nb. Merchant Mr. Kirkor and his son Jerzy, who visited Reinschmidt at your farewell ceremony, bow and wish you good health. Goodbye. \r\n"
"[...] Chopin is already very well known and liked here. nb. Field is here and it was necessary to know. I was at Graff's, as usual, and I was playing my Concerto: then Field enters, and I immediately guessed it was him, because Graff told me that he expected him every moment. Of course I got up at once, but he asked me to play for him; of course, I didn't want to play, and I exiled myself because I wanted to hear him first; he started playing too. Chopin and you are right that he plays like a beginner; no skill, no elegance, no difficulty can win, in a word, a wretched gambler. But it also has its advantages; equal German game, slow, eins, zwei, drei; free trills, but always with four fingers. He played b Concerto, he played cleanly, confidently and evenly. Here you have Field, and no wonder he didn't like it anywhere. Very inventive for Paris and Italy. He praises Chopin, Kalkbrenner, Moscheles, and especially Hummel, and rebukes Herz and Liszt tremendously. He's giving a concert at the theater today, and I'm having lunch with him today. A very polite and honest man. At the end he asked me to play something for him. He dared a little; I smoked Allegro and Rondo for him, which he did here and finished. He liked it very much, and at the end I played him Chopin's Etudes and my Mazurias. He told me in French: ""These young people are truly devilish."" Arcades from Ronda I had to play him several times. I made a few mazurkas ? la Chopin, but more and more freaks [...]"
"My beloved children! You receive the first letter from Papa and my writing. Our joy is indescribable! We hug and squeeze - and what more can we do? Too bad they're not all together. Bob wonderful! How gracious God is to us! What I write is without order; it is better not to think anything today: to use the happiness one has lived. It doesn't matter what I have today. The same parents, always the same, they just got a little older for me. We walk, we lead Mrs. Matula by the arm, we talk about you, we pretend to be evil nephews, we tell each other how many times one has thought about the other. We drink, we eat together. We torture [1] each other, we bang each other. I am au comble de mon bonheur. [2] The same habits, the same movements, in which I grew up, the same hand, which I haven't kissed in so long. Well, my children, I hug you, and forgive me that it is impossible for me to collect my thoughts and write about anything else than that we are happy at this moment; that I only hoped always, and today the realization of this happiness and happiness and happiness. With joy, I suffocate you with your brothers-in-law, as my dearest in this world. Ch. Thousands of kisses to Mr Żywny for the music, and millions of bows to Mr Wiesiołowski, who brought me closer to my happiness by several dozen miles. Mr. Fryd. ditto to the treasurer. [1] To cajolate (from French cajoler) – to caress. [2] Au comble de mon bonheur - at the height of my happiness. \r\n"
"Although you do not like to receive or write letters, I would like to take advantage of Mr. Cichowski's departure to send you a message from Dresden about what has happened here since you left. So I will still bore you (but not with playing). On Saturday, when the Lord left us, we all walked sadly, with eyes full of tears, in this salon where a few minutes ago you were still among us. My father came soon and was sorry that he could not be with the Lord; bid farewell. My mother tearfully reminded us every now and then of a detail from the stay of ""her fourth son, Fryderyk"" (as she calls me). Felix looked quite depressed; Casimir wanted to play pranks, as usual, but that day he failed because he made a puppet out of himself half crying. My father made fun of us and laughed himself, just so as not to cry. At eleven o'clock the singing teacher came; the lesson went very badly, we couldn't sing. The Lord was the subject of all conversations. Felix kept asking me for a Waltz (the last thing we received and heard the Lord play). We found pleasure; them in listening and me in playing, because he reminded us of the brother who had just left us. I took it to the binding; The German's eyes widened at the sight of only one sheet (the German did not know by whom it was written). Nobody ate dinner: we kept looking at your usual place at the table, and then also at Fryck's corner. The chair is always in its place and will probably stay that way as long as we stay in this apartment. In the evening we were taken to my aunt's to avoid the sadness of that first evening which the Lord was no longer to spend with us. Father came for us saying that it would be impossible for him, as for us, to stay in this house that day. It was a great relief to leave a place that reminded us too much of our sorrows. Mom only talks to me about you and Antoś. When my brother is in Paris, think of him at least a little, I beg you. If the Lord only knew what a devoted friend you have in him! It's hard to find a friend like him. Antoni has a kind heart, even more than that, because he is always exploited by others; and because he is very careless, he never thinks of anything, or at least seldom. We've reasoned with him so many times before, but I think it will have more effect if he hears it from the Lord. I know how much he loves you, and I am sure that your words will be an oracle to him. For the love of God, don't be indifferent to him. How happy he will be when, being far from his family, he will find a friendly heart that will understand him. I am not writing to you any more. You know Antoni well, you will get to know him even better. Then you will say of him that he wants to appear worse than he is. If you miraculously wanted to write: How are you? I am well. I have no time to write any more; please add yes or no to the question I am going to ask you: did you compose? – ""If I were the sun in the sky, I wouldn't shine, if only for you"" I received these days, but I don't have the courage to sing it, because I'm afraid, since it's the Lord's, that it might not come out completely changed, like eg Wojak. We do not cease to regret that your name is not Chopinski or that there is no other sign that you are Polish, because in this way the French can argue with us about the honor of being your countrymen. But I've been writing too long. The Lord's time is so precious that it is indeed a crime to take it from Him reading my scribbles. Besides, you certainly won't read them in their entirety. Little Marynia's letter will go to the corner after reading a few words. So I have no reason to reproach myself for stealing the Lord's time. With God (simply). A childhood friend doesn't demand platitudes. Your mother hugs you tenderly. Father and brothers hug most cordially (no, it's not enough) the most ... I don't know how to say anymore. Józia, who was unable to say goodbye to the Lord, instructs me to express my regret for this. I asked Terenia: ""What should I say to Fryderyk from you?"" and she replied: ""Hug him tightly and give him my best regards."" God with the Lord! Maria. PS At the moment when you got into the carriage, you forgot a pencil from your pocketbook on the piano. It must have been very uncomfortable without him on the road; and we bury it here - with respect, like a relic. Thank you again for the canopy. Mlle Wozinska came to me this morning with a great discovery: ""Sister Maria, I know (she said to me) how to pronounce 'Chopin' in Polish - Chopina."" \r\n"
"Ma ch?re Maman. I've been in Paris for three days now. Right at the beginning, in the hotel where I got off, I met Fryderyk, who was asking about me there. We spent the whole evening together. Mom was right to say he hadn't changed, just gotten prettier. We see each other every day, and even now I'm writing this letter at his place, sometimes pausing in writing to listen to Fryderyk playing... I can't write about Paris yet, because I haven't gotten to know it enough yet, but such passages, such streets, such an opera, such singers as Lablache, Rubini, Tamburini are certainly nowhere to be seen or heard. The very first evening I was with Fryderyk at the opera. A huge hall, so that it was difficult for me to tell, sitting on one side, whether a pretty or an ugly one, or an old or a young lady sitting on the opposite side, and everything contributes to the beauty of the hall, and all the distinguished ladies seem lovely. Pardieu! The group of women is a bit different than in Geneva! Nourrit, Levasseur, what singers! And above all, what an orchestra! And what an incomparable exhibition! We were also at the Italian Opera. The Puritani were given. I will say nothing to Mama about Rubini or Lablache or Tamburini or la Grisi. You must hear them! And the theater itself has a wonderful device. Everything here is lined with scarlet velvet, from the stairs to the king's box. In the theater, the world is the most refined and fashionable of all Paris, and Frédéric (but not our Frédéric Chopin) in Robert Macaire, and Madame Déjazet (la sublime [1] Déjazet, as Bernard calls her), what to say about these Mamma? It is true that Déjazet is playing, as I did not even think that an actress could play. Besides, Paris must be seen; what do the descriptions mean? I found it neater, more beautiful than I had exhibited it. What about shop windows? Mom! One huge mirror pane, and underneath it glitters with the splendor of the displayed objects: silks, dresses, dresses, shawls, bronzes there again, paintings here, diamonds here... and next to it, what an antithesis, in the same decent window le charcutier [2 ] exhibits appetizing, wonderful hams and other intricate products of his art. At first it seemed to me that I was in some kind of enchanted palace. Ah! if Mama would come here for two months, for example, next spring: Mama could take Marynia and Feliks with her... It's worth showing them Paris, and for one way to make me such joy, such great joy! Frederick is said to have written a waltz for Marynia in an album: let him keep it as a relic and let no one copy it, lest it become commonplace. In Geneva, after Mom left, I stayed for a few more months. I saw and heard Liszt there; gave a concert avec la Belgiojoso, in favor of Polish and Italian exiles. His playing was indescribable: he played variations of his composition on the piano that Marynia had in her room. My dear Mother, I would like to ask you to send me a new help (yes, 2000 francs) as soon as possible. The journey, the first preparation, the installation cost a lot, and Mrs. Pattey in Geneva had to pay 500 francs. pay an old bill. Fryderyk gets up from the piano and says: ""Tell them that I love them all terribly, but I love them terribly."" I also. Antoni Wodziński. [1] Sublime - sublime. [2] Le charcutier - butcher."
"My dear Fryderyk, it's almost ten o'clock in the evening, Sunday, and I'm already writing to you on my day off; we are healthy, I always love you, thank you for Jasia. We didn't understand the chains. I don't want the Carlsbad ones, just the ones you sent to my husband; and he thanks you, etc., because here one of his colleagues necessarily asks him for it. Give me a kiss. My husband is at his friend's wedding today, so he doesn't even know that I am writing to you. Stay healthy, love us as we love you. On the occasion, you will pick up our finished work, I regret that it can't be today. Isabella."
"My dear child. The letter of November 2, finished on the 19th, arrived and found us all in good health. We needed the little trip we made; Your sisters and their husbands very much regret that they could not attend it, to share the joy and pleasure of seeing you after so long apart. Everyone here admires the affection you showed us by making such a pleasant surprise by your arrival in Karlsbad, a place we will never forget, because just saying the name brings back so many nice memories! We are very glad that you have returned to your occupations and that you have provided yourself with a warm room; for despite the willingness to work, one is not very disposed to it when the fingers are numb from the cold. I greatly applaud your resolve to stay at home more than in previous years, but I don't think it's advisable for you to withdraw completely. Evening parties, when they do not last too long, are a real respite for you, necessary to revive your talent and even to give you new ideas. Nevertheless, I applaud your intention to save something and choose better those whom you can come to the aid of. I was saddened to hear how you were repaid for your good heart; seeing this gentleman, I would not have expected that from him, he must have read JJ Rouseau and learned from him the lesson of ingratitude. At any rate, you have done a favor by giving a man a piece of bread, and in that you have consolation. He visited us quite often, but we haven't seen him for nearly three weeks, maybe someone like him warned him that you know about his unworthy act, it's a science after all. You mention Antoś [Wodziński]; may his stay in Paris not be harmful to him! I'm afraid he won't know how to limit his expenses, but don't let him know that you could lend him anything, for that would not be a sign of friendship; he should think of a frugal life; the richest sources are running out. As I can see from your letters, your stay in Dresden was pleasant for you, since you intend to go there next year, but you should take care that this trip does not consume the fruits of your work laboriously harvested over the winter. A concert tour could, I suppose, cover the travel costs, especially since they cover your works in Germany, so everyone will be curious to hear from you. We will come back to this project later. You did well to introduce Lipinski wherever you could. P. Teichmann left here for Paris, abandoning his lessons. It is a great sacrifice in this season, which is indeed a harvest for him, and for the love of art. I handed him a few words which he must have returned to you, for I suppose he had already visited you before you received this letter. As his field is quite different from yours, it's safe to assume he won't bother you, and I doubt if you'll even need to introduce him anywhere, for his talent will pave the way for him; if it weren't for that, I wouldn't be writing to you, because I don't want to cause you trouble or take up the time you have set aside for other matters. You don't sing, so he won't learn anything from you, though he has a gift for singing anything he hears, they say, because I don't know him enough to know that. – On holidays and Sundays we gather, as usual, at our place; we do not forget about you and we are very happy that - as Jaś tells me - your trip went well. As for the pocket, this one suffered; never mind: you can remedy it if you will, for you have the power to do so. Your mother and I embrace you warmly. Ch."
"If it were such a work as yours, my dearest, I would not regret it, for only praise would be able to resound on my ears; but yeah, we're just waiting for someone to fire some criticism. But less, as long as it is useful, if it can be used; just as we would like what was written to be beneficial, for this purpose was the only reason for doing it. You won't read it, we know it well, but that's why having it in your hand you'll understand better how when we play your unknown composition to play; and yet we are pleased to at least look at these notes that contain the soul, one of the most dear to your family. Or not only for your family, because there are other individuals who love you greatly besides us, and I will tell you the proof about Brykczyński's brother in a moment; he is not a lady, but delighted with you to such an extent that he ordered all your compositions beautifully bound together in one book; at the beginning there is your portrait, and before it, on the page, Ulrich's sonnet to you. Necessarily through one friend, who is on a boarding school with his parents, he asked us for any manuscript of yours, which he wants to attach there as a souvenir. Even though we know that we shouldn't do anything like that without you, because you don't like it, but this good heart obliged us immensely, and I decided to give him something of yours, but something good. So I chose the song ""Konik"", which I rewrite for myself, to deprive others of this dear one for others. If You could answer me now, whether You are not angry, how lovely that would be; for I am afraid that you will ever frown at this heart that loves and values you more than life. When I told Lindowa that you might come to Dresden next year, she replied: “Oui, si certaines personnes y sont. Oh, Marie has captured his heart; mais vous, Madame, et moi qui l'avons connu...” and again a recapitulation of what she tells us every time we see her: about the concert, about Chodkiewicz; Mon Dieu, il mangeait des épinards quand je l'ai fait appeler; mes pauvres chevaux attendaient et il ne venait pas... ce qu'aussi Mme W. l'accaparait, comme elle pouvait, elle le faisait asseoir toujours entre elle et Marie; cette jeune personne qui est extr?ment bien, le g?nait... [1] [1] Oui, si certaines... le g?nait... - Yes, if there are certain people there... But you and I, who knew him ... My God, he ate spinach when I told him to ask for it; my poor horses were waiting and he didn't come... but Mrs. W. kept him as well as she could; she made him sit between her and Maria; this young creature, who is very handsome, intimidated him… \r\n"
" am infinitely grateful to you, my beloved, for the feelings you have kept for us, and for the effort you take in writing to us about our beloved Fryderyk. If you knew how much we have suffered in these two weeks and more! If your classes leave you free for a while, and Fryderyk will not have time, pick up a pen, write to us and force him to add a few words to your letter - this will be enough to reassure us. After the anxieties we had suffered, any delay would have worried us, especially at this time of year when it is so easy to catch a cold. I am very grateful to you for making him wear shoes more appropriate for the season than he was accustomed to wear. I also wish you could get him to go to late parties less often; going to bed at two is good for automatons, not for those whose mind is working and who thinks. I understand that Frederick has relations which he must not neglect, but let it be less frequent. I am very glad that he has arranged for a fireplace, which warms his apartment better, because it is very unpleasant to work with numb fingers. From the letter to Fryderyk you will see that we are making plans for next summer; it's always a nice dream, even if it doesn't come true. You know very well that nothing is impossible with money and health, so he must think of both. The stay in Karlsbad was so pleasant - why were the aftermaths so unpleasant in Heidelberg? Fryderyk needs more comforts when traveling, being awake for several nights in a row is bad for him; it will be better if he travels longer in the future and has more comforts - because of health, which, however good, is delicate; the spiritual takes precedence over the physical, so the latter must be looked after. Even if you should quarrel, insist on what you think is necessary, and Frederick is too sensible not to see that you are right. What you tell me about the newcomers surprises me, and I pity them that they have made such a great journey and have found nothing higher than what they have already seen. I hug you with all my heart. Ch. I am posting a review for a review. Fryderyk knows the authors."
My life, where does Brzowski live?...
"My dear child, my dearest, no letter has ever been more desired and awaited more impatiently than the one we have just received! The reason was this: for three weeks there had been a rumor that you were dangerously ill; everyone was asking us if we had news from you, and we didn't know what that meant. We finally got this unfortunate news by chance just before Christmas, you can imagine our consternation, our mortal anxiety. Mrs. Zawadzka, who had recently received letters from Paris, tried to reassure us by quoting yet another letter in which there was information that you had given a musical evening for Mr. Lipinski, that Mrs. Mickiewicz had attended it; and the kind Mrs. Fontanowa came to tell us that her son wrote on December 12 and talked a lot about you. All this did little to reassure us - until last Monday your true friend, kind Zielinski (Jan), read in the Journal des Débats of the 24th that you were to improvise on some evening in the rue de la Chaussée d'Antin No. 3, ran to the Jędrzejewiczes to inform them. I was lucky enough to be there; we hastened to Lourse at once, and I read the reference with my own eyes. This was enough to reassure many, but your hearts still doubted... in addition, unfortunately, the time when we usually receive your letter passed; this made our uneasiness even more vexing. At last we have recovered from our fears, you are well, all forgotten. It is a pity that you did not mention your illness in your previous letter; all these rumors we would have related to another time. How fortunate that Providence allowed you to meet those two guardian angels who surrounded you with so much effort and who, as you say, inquire about your health so often. I know you do not like to write, however, my dear child, a word from you would, I believe, give them much pleasure. – I see from your letter that you are very busy both with lessons and composing, but I also see with regret that you do not rest much; these long evenings, though, as you say, necessary, must be harmful to you, especially at a time when it is so easy to catch a cold. I know that these great parties allow you to make new friends very valuable, but health? As I can see, Dresden has become a very interesting place for you and seems to be attracting you. At your age you are not always the master of your will, you can experience sensations that are not easily erased. But who can stop you from taking a little trip next spring und riechen was du nicht gerochen hast? [1] It is only necessary to save as much as possible, because I could send you a traveling companion to Berlin or Dresden, but at your expense. I informed your dear mother about this project, and during the holidays Barciński[ski], his wife and I would go for her. What do you think about it? After all, it's a beautiful ice castle, you might say. Never mind, we build it ourselves. I think that if it turned out to be realizable, you could not have better care than having your mother with you. I will endure this temporary separation with the thought of its cause. But that requires health and resources, so you must think of both; it is the only way you will see Dresden again and what it can do for you, if the impression has not yet faded in you. Mr. Wodziński was here before Christmas, he visited us, but without his sons. From the eagerness with which he learned of news from you, we later learned that he knew about the rumor, and under the pretense of waiting for the mail to see if you would write something about Antoś, he delayed his departure for two days. I was very happy to hear that you are happy with Antosia, that you like it; I was afraid of the carelessness and absent-mindedness of which I knew him, and I am glad that you reassure me on this point. – You see, my dear child, how much the delay of nearly two weeks cost us; if you can't write for lack of time, recommend it to Johnny and add only a few words, because - however the longer your letters are, the more they give us pleasure - we will be happy with even the little you write. Mrs. Lynde always speaks of you with the greatest admiration - she is your great friend. She wrote to you through Mr. Durand; if you have received her letter, try to answer her in a word, either separately or in a letter to us. She spared no effort to dispel our anxieties. From what you tell us about Teich[mann's] method and views, it is to be assumed that he will take first place, so that he might have the fantasy of staying with you longer than was in the project. You would undoubtedly gain, but we would lose. ""What's Wolf doing?"" Isn't he working on himself? Is Calc. won't make him an old school student? It's sad that Lipiński[ski] doesn't know how to please, that he has no success. Tastes vary. [Add.] I finish, my dear child, embracing You with all my heart; our health, thank God, is quite good. Your loving mother, who hugs you to her heart, laughs at my project - what do you think about it? I hug you once more. Ch. [1] Und riechen... hast (German) – here: he has learned what you do not know yet."
"Mr. Albrecht told me that you promised him to come to me for lunch on Wednesday, February 3rd. Had I known that I would find the Lord, I would have come to Him to thank Him; but I was already with the Lord and did not find Him; so I defer until Wednesday the pleasure of expressing my gratitude to Him in person. In the meantime, please accept the assurance of my true respect. A. de Custine. I live rue de la Rochefoucauld number 9"
"My dear Frederick! How can I begin to apologize to You for the abuse of Your kindness, and above all for the waste of time. But you'd think to yourself: what are you doing when you're apologizing; I'd like to tell you why. Wanting to send a small amount to Antek, for various reasons I could not do what he asked, and luckily it occurred to me that I could not go better than to the one who constantly and always gives us so much evidence of his favor towards us. So you know the reason. Would you like to do the rest now and give it to my Cémbał enclosed here. My dear Fritz, do not deny him your friendly advice, encourage him to find some employment, because an idle life causes many misfortunes. God will reward you a hundredfold. You won't believe how many tears I shed because of this and fear for him. You, who are such a good son, can feel it. If he ever finds himself in need, then rescue him and let me know as soon as possible. I recommend him to you; I know that your time is precious, but I also know your good heart and I am sure that you would spend a moment with me then. I had news here about your parents and sisters. Mr. Leopold, Mr. Pruszak's brother, was here; he said it was all very healthy. Maria as well as Józia send you tender bows; the first, informed that she is to receive sheet music from you, is overjoyed. Thér?se Wozińska also often mentions in Polish, she also often connects her brother with you saying: ""J'ai bien du chagrin par mon fr?re Antoine et Chopena aussi"" [1] , and she really cries, that is, really. When can we see you too? Also, if you could write at least two words and say, is it true that you are to be here this summer; because here Clara Wieck (and more so) Chevalier Kuntzel told us and they assure us, also Kuntzelek said that you cried when you heard P. Wieck in Leipzig; because I am ashamed that I did not cry at her concert either, but I liked her playing very much – and her whole demeanor was so nice, so interesting. There is a young Wolf from Geneva here at the moment, who is going to St. Petersburg with Mrs. Nesselrode and will stay there for three years. – Adieu, my good Frycek, we always and always remember you here, because you sincerely have those who love you in us. I hug you, my dear Frycek, together with Antek and I bless you both. T. Wodzińska. [1] J'ai bien... aussi (French) – I have a lot of worries because of my brother Antoni and Chopin."
I'm healthy - and it's even - This excellent news With an embrace flies To the children. FF. Chopin. [ Jan Matuszyński's postscript ] Another news is coming To my dear children, That Fryc will fly to Waszć next year. \r\n
" I learned from Liszt that you were seriously ill, so I hasten to remind you that Croissy would be an excellent health resort for you, if you would like to go there for a while, you would breathe good air. I promise you wonderful milk and nightingale music that will tire you less than the piano. But allow me to say to myself that I love your Etudes, they are wonderful; I haven't heard anything so beautiful in a long time. Goodbye Lord, I hope goodbye; please believe in my sincere kindness Countess d'Agoult."
"Dear Mr Chopin. When I had the pleasure of seeing you during my last trip to Paris, I told you that I wanted to ask you for some information for a biographical article that I am dedicating to you in my Historical Dictionary of Musicians. I need this information because I am printing a sheet with your name on it. So I am asking you to fill out the sheet I am sending you immediately; it contains various questions that I would like you to answer. Would you kindly send me this sheet, if possible by return mail. Dedicated to Mr. CF Fétis."
 Dear Sir, I hasten to send back to Him a card filled in as requested. Please accept the assurance of my total devotion. FF. Chopin. Kudos to Mrs Fetis.
"My dear friend. It's meant to be an invitation to the Lord, though I haven't written a symphony or made stockings. As a matter of fact, I did neither for the Lord's sake, lest he should be compelled to come to Leipzig in the middle of winter, for I am sure you would have done it immediately if I had been knitting or composing as we had agreed. I am writing to you to inquire whether your time will permit Him to attend the Lower Rhine Music Festival which is to be held in Düsseldorf for Pentecost. Several of our musicians who are going there ask me to write to you with an invitation, because they believe in the possibility that you will accept it. Although I admit that I doubt it, and I am afraid that the music festival you attended did not arouse in you great desire to once again dedicate your time and such a long journey to it, the opportunity to see each other and spend time with The Lord of a few days is so pleasant to me that I do not hesitate to write to Him for this intention, even if I have to run the risk that you will laugh at it. Beethoven's Ninth Symphony with choirs, a psalm by Handel, Beethoven's overture (unknown so far, the third he wrote to Fidelio), my Oratorio (of which you have seen some excerpts from me) and many other things will be performed. If you can, please come, it would be the greatest joy for me, and if you cannot, then please do not mock my invitation, which I would not dare to accept if it were not for the fervent requests of all those who will be there and who want to see and hear the Lord more often and longer than during his last stay with us. Please excuse the French of this letter, which, without flattering myself, seems to me hideous; I haven't spoken French since the last time you saw me. If you will answer me in a word, it will give me great pleasure; and although I know that the Lord never answers, this time I ask Him; please tell me, at the same time, what you are composing now, what Hiller is doing, whether you have news from Liszt, etc. Please greet them all and do not forget about the devoted inhabitant of the swamp (which you probably think Germany is). Adieu, please forgive the style of your Felix Mendelssohn-Bartholdy. Of course, if you wish to have a solemn invitation, I will send you a letter from the mayor, signed by the Committee and bearing as many other signatures as you like. But I don't think that made a great impression on the Lord."
"Before the sealing I came and I am writing in the place of Izabela, who is sitting at home because it is cold; two inches of snow fell this morning, but our hearts are always on fire for you, we are only sorry that you have forgotten us. He refuses to do so. The waiting is annoying. Wake up and improve, write more often, and you will make all of us, who sincerely and sincerely love and adore you, happy. Anthony Yours."
"Izabela was about to start writing, but someone interrupted, so I decided to give you a kiss from her and from her husband. – By the way, you wouldn't believe how many people ask me about your opinion about Lip[inski's] concert; Lvov magazines talk about him with admiration, I did not publish your opinion, but if something about it is widely known, I will be grateful if you inform me about it. We also heard about Zyg[munt?] and his success. Also, let us know what you plan to do over the summer; will you stay in paris As for us, it doesn't look like we're going to move, but I won't forget Karlsbad. Many people from here are to go there, including Zawadzki, and his wife, who was very sick during the winter, is going to Obersalzbrunn. “Your Concert has arrived here. Ern[emann] told me that he already had it, other people also bought it, including your sisters. Now[akowski] tries to win it, he always admires you; all our experts and amateurs are eager to see and hear you again. But that wouldn't make bread. Mrs. Nakwaska should leave soon and she is willing to take your box, which Heinricht has beautifully restored; it is estimated here at PLN 80; it will be a very nice souvenir of your childhood for you. Try to fill it up, its locks are good, and the Louisianas will not be ashamed to gather in it and make their home there; make sure it's not empty when you get it."
"Dear, dear Pope, I have composed a poem for you, which I know will make you emotional; but the truth is that although I feel well how difficult it is for you to be punctual, you won't believe, dearest Fritz, the sensation we experience when... you know what, because I dare not bore you by writing down so many repeated words in our letters, to which , as sometimes, so at this moment, you might wince or utter a movement of the whole person: ah! more impatient than sentimental. It would not be con fuoco, but neither would it be con cuore, and though con anima [1], I prefer a sigh to us in another sense; tere long bzdere that otherwise bores you again. My dearest, what can come out of us other than nudity and emptiness? If you collected not only this letter, but all the ones you have received so far, and wanted to squeeze out the content, what more would you find than that we love you more than life itself, that we live for you, that we sometimes bore you a little with this attachment, and even if only we would advise you to please to impress You, we will not change until that moment when there is a complete change in our body and form and in our lives. Next week Mrs. Nakwaska Anatolowa is going to visit you. Jealousy aroused again, and envy without hope of fulfillment, though we are all well; only the railroads are not ready yet. But then, it's like today on Sunday and every holiday at my parents', so one day a month at Mr. Fryc's. I would have agreed to one in my life, if only when it happened. They say that the hope of foolish luck; I flatter myself that I can be counted in this row, and I don't know why I don't think I could hug you otherwise, how unbearably, because of these papers! My dear, what has happened to these children, Kazio and Felcio, what boys they are! One is getting married, and the other is also about to mature. It has become very similar to... what am I doing, I forgot you saw them. What a man Antoś must be! Mrs. Wodzińska goes to the waters, only to come back here. Brock died. Mrs Fryderykowa very bad. Lindowa was leaving in those days, but she did not emerge from danger. What I also forgot to write to you in the last letter, and so Zieliński asked me to take advantage of the occasion of Mr. Steinkeller and through him sent this unhappy and happy bow. nb. these are not Zieliński's words, but mine; that is why I am explaining this so that your admirer will not be suspected that he may resent you for not fulfilling his request, which is a great part of life's consolations, until now. What is delayed is not eluded, it is true, but Steinkeller is expected any day; maybe a bow with him, it will be so for this poor Zieliński, as for us, when Briefträger at some expected time, instead of Papa's address, from Paris to which boarder he carries a signed letter. "" Ah! pardon, Monsieur, ce n'est pas pour Vous que je l'ai dit! [2] I remembered your strange butler. – Łusia's father, who visited his parents in those days, talked to them a lot about you, remembered how pleasantly he spent a long time with you. I only told him about Albrecht's marriage, because Łusia thought that his father did not know him: he was pleased with this news, which, however old, was new to him. We already abound in the news ""Ms. Bona died"" and if there is anything about you, we are as happy as with ""Carl Minter in Warschau"". – Mleczko, being with us, told you to hug you warmly and tell you to accept it with equal heart, because he reportedly said: “[I] am not very favored by him; before I tried for Olesia, everything was fine, but when I got married, he was so angry with me and didn't like me because he wanted Oleś for Tytus. But that's why I always love him, and now that it's hard to make up for it, let the friendly genuine embrace, not get angry and love us both as we love him."" Both Oleś and Mother and all of them begged me to kiss You from them. Oleś learns to play from Szwarcbach, who, taken over by your composition and only yours, plays things, and began to feed her with them; she only begins with things more digestible for her, such as mazurkas, waltzes, which, however ... but enough of that, because Izabela has yet to write. “Mrs. Diller wrote to Mom. Honest, apparently they do not mention your weakness; and without talking back, they haven't written back yet, which you are probably triumphant about, - Adieu, our dearest Fryciu, be healthy, happy, loved, loving us, writing and believing that there are no beings more attached to you than we are. LJ Husband hugs you and Grandpa tells you that Toto is good. nb. at the moment, and that's news, because it doesn't happen to him often. – Wiesiołowski Teofil came in and greets you too; but Zywny is not there, because he has a rose on his leg. He heals himself. Of course, he doesn't spend much on medicine, but he's better now. He sits on the sofa with legs, on one of which this flower is sitting, and content. I think next Sunday he will multiply the lead count. – One more adieu and a hug from the soul! [1] Con fuoco... con cuore... con anima (Italian) – with fire... with heart... with thought. [2] Ah! Pardon... dit (French) – Ah! I'm sorry, sir, that wasn't referring to you."
"You printed, true, but it's not a receipt, Because your letter will not come to us for too long. That you are well, it may be, but we do not know it, and we all remain impatient. Break the silence, draw once with a pen, And each of us will say: what is he doing? I already know. Indeed, my dear Child, the seventh week is passing and the letter has not arrived. You have never kept us waiting so long since you left, and though I imagine you are very busy, I can't control my anxiety. It is true that I was told that news had reached you that there was an Easter celebration at your place, but a month has passed since those holidays, and there is no letter. I am far from accusing you of negligence, but nevertheless I suffer from it, for these evenings, this work during the day, cannot be beneficial to your health, and your strongest nature can suffer. So put yourself in our position for a moment; the affection you have always had for us will make it easy for you to understand what is going on within us. I was told Mr. Steinkeller was coming; I await it impatiently, convinced that he saw you before he left, and that he will give us quite recent news, for I know from Teichmann that you saw him in Paris. About us I don't have much to tell you; we lead a very monotonous life, and the only entertainment we enjoy very much is that we all gather together every Sunday; you think we're talking about you. Your mother's health and mine are tolerable, and no serious illness has befallen us, but I see that I am less able to work every day, my memory is visibly failing, and so is my eyesight. I recently met Elsner, he is giving lessons now. Jaw[urek] is not in good health; the stone annoys him, and as a result he loses all his lessons, and besides, his wife is constantly ill. When I look around me, I am still satisfied with our fate, and since the heart of feelings does not change, Your mother and I embrace You very warmly. Ch. A thousand greetings from us to Jaś; those dear to him enjoy good health."
"Dear Mr. Chopin! This morning I got a letter from my son announcing that he will come here on the 14th and asking you to warn the Lord about it. His stay will not last longer than 4, at most 5 days; wants to see his best friends, among whom he counts you first of all. Adieu, I kiss the Lord with all my heart. A. Liszt."
"My dear friend! Although I am sure that you will not answer me this letter as well as all the ones I have written to you so far, I could not bear it any longer without talking to you at least a little. Yesterday I had news about you from Wodziński, whom I met quite by chance (because I had just come from Düsseldorf) and whom I tried to amuse a bit. – Yesterday evening he left again for Weimar, etc. He told me, among other things, that he met Liszt at your place – if it wasn't funny, I'd ask you to write something about it for me. “It is not yet four weeks since I left Paris that I have seen so many people and such that I think I am dreaming. “In Weimar I met Hummel again. - In Mendelssohn's Düsseldorf - if you want to know details about the celebration, go to Leo, to whom I have just written a long letter about it. “In short, it worked perfectly. I am very happy that Feliks will come here for six weeks to 2 months. – There will be bloody fights; but since we will come to an agreement in essence, peace will soon return. Can we still hope to see you here this summer? it would be very nice. We have a nice apartment here, my piano arrived safe and sound, and though I lack many things, I trust that I will pass this summer quite bearably. “Poor Schellble, whom I have often mentioned to you, is unfortunately very ill. Nervous exhaustion or God knows what. This may prevent him from taking up leadership again, but the good of our beautiful academy here depends on it. 'Ries is giving a concert next Wednesday consisting entirely of Beethoven's works, the proceeds going to Bonn for the monument to our Napoleon of music. – Ries himself will play the Concerto in C minor on it. “Last night [illegible] so-so! I don't know what he used to open the piano three times since I left Paris. God be with you, dear friend, go to Cherubini, give him many greetings from us and say that their letter gave us great pleasure - I will write again soon. Bow to Mr. and Mrs. d'Est - greet also a thousand times Matuszyński and Stockhausen, Alkan, etc. - kind words to the esteemed Plater family. Remind me to those who have forgotten me and thank me to those who remember me. - Adieu, dear child, try to be content and happy and have me always and forever as your sincere friend. Ferdinand Hiller. Much love from my mother and me to the dear Eichthal family. By the way, I had a letter from Dessauer - he doesn't write anything important. - Goodbye. I need not tell you that my mother adores you always and that she wears your ring as if you were her betrothed."
You are the only person I authorize to come to Saint-Gratien whenever he pleases and without telling me. That's all I wanted to say to you with a thousand words of friendship. A. de Custine.
 Dear Shop, [...] Less than 200 fr. it is not right to give, but more can be done. Your copies will be scattered among the customers and at this moment you will receive the advanced sum in double. Then we'll have something good to eat for dinner. – I hug you warmly. J. Bem. \r\n
"My dear and esteemed Lord. Only one word: ""yes"", will you write me or tell me who to write to me, namely, are you in Dresden, as I hear now. I intend to go to my homeland via Dresden and I would never forgive myself if, being so close to the Great One, I did not express my words of admiration and love to Him. So, once again, I am asking you most longingly for a ""yes"" and for the Lord's address. Devoted Robert Schumann. Mendelssohn will be back here next week."
"Dear Fryderyk! According to our arrangement, I am sending you a letter to Mrs. Nakwaska; I would have done it for two days if it hadn't been for the tooth that I ordered to take out after your departure and I suffered a lot on this occasion. I cannot regret that you left on Saturday; I was in pain that day, I couldn't get enough of The Gray Hour, we talked about it briefly. Tomorrow would have been longer. P. Girardin says: ""En toute chose le lendemain est un grand jour - nous l'avons devant nous."" [1] Don't think that I take back what I said, no; but it was necessary to take the path which must be followed. Until then, I will only ask you to be silent; stay healthy, because everything depends on it. Kazio arrived on Sunday. How have I found him different since he left. If in Bohemia the air is filled with opium, there I am unfailingly crazy (Digitalis). What a prospect for Mary! Who knows what it will be like next year. I leave Józia here with Miss Mallet, and in the spring I will come myself and go to the waters again. This is my project and God willing it will come to fruition. If God grants that Antoś comes back healthy, encourage him to work, let him learn what he can, because his brothers know little, and it would be a shame for women to be higher than all brothers. Now I can't send him anything, because (as Kazio says) that Father, the richest in the whole province, must live accordingly; it is good, but, in my opinion, it is wrong to let a child starve to death because of it. As soon as I come to Warsaw, I will send to you what I can for Antoś, and now I am asking you, if you have any information about him, give it to me. From now on, I will stay here for two more weeks, and on October 15 I will be in Warsaw, because the wedding is to take place on that day. I will see your parents and sisters; I will tell them that you are well and cheerful, though I will not mention the Gray Hour. But be sure of my favor towards you; this precaution is necessary to fulfill my wish and to test these feelings. Adieu! Go to bed at 11am, use l'eau de gomme for a drink until January 7th. P. Matuszyński will agree with me, and like Skórzewski you will turn out in Marienbad or Franzensbrun. Be well, dear Fritz, I bless you from my soul as a mother who loves you. TW Maria sends you slippers via p. Germany. They are a little big, but I add that you should wear woolen stockings; so judged Paris, and I presume that you will obey, after all you promised. Finally, consider that this is a testing time. [1] En toute... devant nous (French) - tomorrow is always a great day - because we have it before us. \r\n"
"My dearest Lord. The other day, when I received a letter from the Lord, which I wanted to answer immediately, he entered - who? Chopin! The joy was great. We had a beautiful day, which I celebrated only yesterday... Chopin gave me a new Ballade (in G minor). It seems to me to be the closest to his genius (not the most brilliant) of his work, and I told him that of all he had created, it was the most to my heart. After a rather long silence, he replied emphatically: ""It makes me happy, because I also like her the most, she is the dearest to me."" Then he played me a multitude of etudes, mazurkas and nocturnes, all incomparable. Just seeing him at the piano is moving. You would love him for sure. However, Klara is a greater virtuoso than he is and gives his compositions almost even more expression than himself. Just imagine: finite perfection, a mastery that doesn't seem to realize its value! [...] With cordial friendship devoted R. Schumann."
"Nous ne pouvons consoler nous de votre départ; les trois jours, qui viennent de passer, nous ont few ?tre des siecles; faites-vous de m?me? Regrettz-vous un peu vos amis? Oui, je repons pour vous, et je pense que je ne me trompe pas; du moins j'ai besoin de le croire. Je me dis que ce oui vient de vous (car n'est-ce pas? vous l'auriez dit). The slippers are finished, I'm sending them. What worries me is that they are too big, although I gave Takowski your shoe, carissimo maestro, made to measure, but simply German. Docteur Paris me console, en disant que c'est bien pour vous, car vous devez porter en hiver des bas de laine bien chauds . Mom had a tooth pulled out; it made her very weak. Until then, she had to stay in bed. We are going to Poland in two weeks. Je verrai vos parents: quel bonheur pour moi; et cette bonne Louise, me reconnaîtra-t-elle? Adieu, mio carissimo maestro, n'oubliez pas maintenant Dresde et dans peu la Pologne. Adieu, au revoir! Ah! ci cela pauvait ?tre au plus tôt! Maria. Kazio told me that the Służew piano was so ruined that it was impossible to play it. Ainsipensez a Pleyel. In happier times like today's (this is for us) j'esp?re vous entendre sur le m?me piano; au revoir, au revoir, au revoir! Cell f [a] ut espérer. [1] [1] Nous ne pouvons... dit - We are disconsolate at the departure of the Lord; the last three days seemed like ages to us; do you too? Do you feel even a little bit missing your friends? I answer for you: yes, and I think I am not mistaken; at least I feel the need to believe it. I tell myself that ""yes"" is from the Lord (because the Lord would say so, wouldn't he?). Docteur... chauds - Dr. Paris comforts me by saying that they will be good on you as you should wear very warm woolen stockings in winter. Je verrai... au plus tôt - I will see the Lord's parents: what happiness for me; and this good Ludwika, will she recognize me too? Goodbye, my dearest master, do not forget Dresden now, and soon Poland. Goodbye. Ah! both as soon as possible! Ainsi... ? Pleyel – so think about Pleyel; j'espére... espérer – I hope to hear you play this piano; goodbye, goodbye, goodbye! You have to have hope. \r\n"
"Dear Chopin. I did something terrible, I misunderstood Madame de Castellane's letter; her daughter went to the Lord without her and was disappointed not to try on like yesterday on Don Juan. This disappointment does not deter her, she pleads earnestly that the Lord will not leave her to her hazy sense of music; I will add from myself that this is already a beautiful talent, you will be pleased with such a student; as for me, I should be happy if I could teach her anything. Lucky you!... Thanks for yesterday's honorable, kind and rare visit; I need my friends to think of me because one of them, a very old one, is in agony. A. de Custine. Liszt wants to give Madame de Contades lessons, and she wants to take them from the Lord: it is quite reminiscent of the thwarting of love in Pastor Fido."
"My dear Frick! I am grateful to you for telling me something about Antonia. Yesterday I received your letter and I must admit that I was only waiting for it. The day after tomorrow I am leaving and in 12 days I will be in Warsaw and I will hug your parents and sisters for you. Write to us as many times as time permits; address - ? - pr. Addresse des Herrn J. G. Adolph zu Thorn, peer Berlin. Yes, I receive all letters. I am asked to write to you recommending Byczkowski, the painter who was ordered to leave here. I know little of him, but as much as I think he is a good man, and what he says most about him is that he is unhappy. I believed from your letter that you only promise to faithfully fulfill my orders by lying, because you will not write anything, i.e. wool stockings with slippers, or you will go to bed before 11 o'clock; only Mrs. Nakwaska, like Kunzel, lied. By the way, Kunzel has already returned; they are sulking that you have not been to the Kaskles, and many people are grimacing at me; I will lose credit because of you. Yes it is in this world. Maria asks you to wear slippers every day, and if you find an opportunity, new romance novels, which will probably fall on New Year's Day. Józia stays quite calmly, looks forward to our return and promises a lot. My God, will only I be able to arrive as I wish and where! I don't know anything, that is, the deal is done, because as I say, they are angry with me for you, and that's all Kaskel told me: ""J'ai donné l'ordre."" [1] I'll write to you from Warsaw, and now I'm telling you to protect yourself, and everything else will be fine. Mr. Osso. bows from us. Her brother was only here for one day; healthy. Mr. Mallet bows prettily, asks about Grzymała; unhappy passion! Your portrait is so similar that Maria says that her reputation as an artist will be established. From then on, she made a portrait of Maciejowa and Ciccarelli, because he asked for it; in 2 sessions, very similar. Back to Byczkowski. When you see him, don't forget to tell him that I wrote to you and that you already know him. Izabelka Plater asked me to write to you recommending him to you, and you know that I love her so much that I don't know, that is, there is a great difference between her and Maria. Terenia mentions you often: elle bien des compliments. [2] P. Mallet, Józia, Maria bow beautifully and everyone, everyone: Kazio, Paris, and I hug you most tenderly. [1] J'ai donné l'ordre (French) - I gave the order. [2] Elle bien des compliments (fr.) - lots of cordiality."
Thank you very much for the autographs and I am asking for more (this is what Mom told me to write). Now we are going to Warsaw as soon as possible. Combien je me réjouis de revoir toute votre famille et l'année prochaine Vous. Kazio told us a lot about Łusia (et malgré tout ce que vous pourriez dire, puisque vous étiez d'avis contraire), he finds that she resembles me. Cell me flatte beaucoup, car on la dit ?tre tr?s bien. Adieu, jusqu'? Mai ou Juin ou plus tard. Je recommande ? votre souvenir votre tr?s fid?le secrétaire . [1] Maria. [1] Combien... fid?le secrétaire (fr.) - How happy I am to see your whole family, and next year you... (and despite everything you might say, because you were of the opposite opinion). .. I'm very flattered because they say she's very handsome. Goodbye in May or June or later. I commend to your memory his faithful secretary. \r\n
"J.W. and most gracious lady! I am sending a letter from Pamplona signed by Antoś. I took Mrs. Diller's way, and luckily it worked out. It seems to me that the content of this letter sped up the signature, and thanks to Wincenty's footnote you can see that Antoś is always there, that they love him and remember him, that he is well, if it is possible, that he is not alone. I waited impatiently for this letter, and meanwhile the time for blessings has passed for you, because Feliks must have been married, and the wedding was gaily and lavishly, there was certainly dancing, and health was fulfilled, a few days of visits were given, received, etc. Why is it not true about these mirrors? depicting everything, about those rings that take you wherever your mind goes... And my parents asking about me... Mr. Byczkowski is not here yet; I will take it as best as I can. I am happy that my today's letter is only Antosiowy's envelope: otherwise it would not tell you much by itself, at least as far as the number of things is concerned. Today, somehow, I do not want the news to lie under the pen. All Saints' autograph, however, Antosia and Mrs. Anatolowa save me. I do not send others to the Secretary, because I am afraid of burdening the letter: towards winter I will send it together with the notes. Mrs. Zofia always loves you and remembers you with real pleasure. Cicholo, my present neighbor, often asks about you. Why is it twelve o'clock already? At twelve you have to go to lessons, and so until six, and then for dinner, and from dinner to the evening out (until 11 o'clock). As I respect you, I'm not lying, I only think about slippers and play for a gray hour. Please be kind enough to send me a word to the post office, has Antoni's letter arrived? The most attached F. Chopin. I would like to express my respects to Mr. Wodziński. To the secretary, that I am inexpressibly glad that he has not forgotten to write, that I hope that he will not forget that he has no relations with Heidler. As for Felix, I'm sure he doesn't care about any people being reminded today. I hug Kazia, and Teresa, apart from kissing my hands, let Miss Maria be kind enough to explain that Madmozel il is melancholy for her, and when the little child sees it, she sadly exclaims pas sa, pas sa ue le pti Tereski e si żantil! [1] To all of you, health in Służewo, in the vicinity, as well as in Dresden. If Miss Glińska remembers me, my regards to Miss Teresa. [1] Ną pas sa... (French) - phonetically written French text: Non pas ça, non pas ça, o? est le petit Thér?se, qui est si gentille - It's not that, that's not where little Teresa is which is so nice. \r\n"
"It is unfortunate that today I cannot finish my activities before seven o'clock: we would neither eat nor talk; so I order Mr. Brzowski's courtesy for another time, both for him and for me. FFC. \r\n"
 My darling. I forgot to tell you yesterday that today, Tuesday evening, at 9 o'clock, I am playing music at my place. Please, be sure to come if you want me to be well. Your old F.Ch.
 Today I have a few people at my place, among others Mrs. Sand, while Liszt plays, Nourrit sings. If it's acceptable to Mr. Brzowski, I'm waiting for him tonight.
" My dear Chopin, if you are going out this morning, kindly stop by for a moment; I have a deal with you. If you're not leaving, I'll come to you. A word of answer. F. Halévy."
I'm getting the hang of it (as our girls say) that I can't spend the evening with you today because of someone else's extremely boring and without truffles dinner. Buzi F. Ch.
 My dear Chopin. I am forced to deny myself the pleasure of coming to the Lord for dinner. The sore throat, quite violent, which has not left me for two weeks or more, has intensified since yesterday. The doctor recommended that I eat little and talk even less, both are very unpleasant at the table. Denying myself both of these pleasures only saddens me because it prevents me from being in the company of Liszt, you, and your friends, and there are some among them whom I hope to call my friends as well. Will you, my good, dear Chopin, express to them all my regrets and at the same time accept the assurance of my feelings of friendship. Yours faithfully, F. Halévy.
"You have reached the heights of suffering and poetry; the melancholy of your songs penetrates deeper into hearts; the hearer is alone with the Lord even in a crowd; it is no longer a piano, it is a soul, and what a soul! May the Lord be for your friends: to be able to hear you sometimes is a real consolation in the difficult days that threaten us; only art, as you feel it, will be able to unite people separated by the real side of life; people love and understand each other through Chopin. You have made the audience a circle of friends; at last you have equaled yourself; that says enough. May the Lord think of me; I can only think of the Lord. Always the same A. de Custine. \r\n"
Poles, in my opinion, have such a frivolous character that I cannot help but fear that you have forgotten our lunch today, so I hasten to remind you of your promise, thanking you once again for the pleasure you gave me last time, and especially me, because, like few others, I feel and appreciate your talent. Thousand greetings. I expect to see you at 6 o'clock. A. de Custine.
"My dear Mr. Chopin, Pleyel, Coubeaux and one of your former pupils, Madame Olivier, who remarried Mr. Jean Reynaud of the Encyclopédie, will dine with us the day after tomorrow, Thursday; Mrs. Gangler offers us her evening; if you would like to spend a few hours with people you like, with people who like you, come here at six o'clock and you will be very, very welcome. Of course you'll leave your fingers at home. Since you don't like to write, say yes or no to my servant. Lord E. Legouvé."
 I'm sending you stalls for Musard, but please don't sit down, because they are my friends with whom I promised to be, and I can't be. Loving you F. Ch.
"My good Fry! We received your letter a long time ago, and soon afterwards a package with sheet music, for which I will not thank you, but I will scold you. How was it possible to send kepsach [1] . Also, when writing about the piano, you didn't write how much to send you, and here you need to know beforehand to collect for it. I would also ask you to tell us where it is addressed to Gdańsk, because we calculated that if only Adolph had been informed of the arrival of the same, I would immediately send a cart from here to Gdańsk; it's only 25 miles from here, so he could be here by spring. Here, with us, it is very sad, since our return from Warsaw, we have not moved a step anywhere, nor have we had any visitors. Youth, this is my husband, Feliks and Kazio, go around and have fun, because please believe that there are balls, concerts and theaters in this area as well. Only we old people, that is me, Maria and Teresia, spend lonely days in the castle, and the clock is stronger than when it strikes and reminds us of the time of rest or food, because I cannot have other employment without a piano, pencils, books, etc. Speaking of pencils, Teresia sends her own drawing work and faire bien des compliments recommended. It remains for me to ask you to inform me that Mr. Dzierożyński is not in Paris or that he was not there and where he might be now. He is a patron from Warsaw, but as 1000 francs were left with him by one poor person, that's why I ask so carefully about them. The autographs are strange, the footnote by Heine and D'Arlincourt is very nice to me, also Custine's note. My last letter, I don't know what it was, but the fact that I didn't mention anything about anyone may have been the reason why I was forced to send it back sooner than I thought, because it always happens that way; when the forester comes, they keep shouting: hurry up, because it's three miles post office. That's what's happening today; I won't have time to read it, which is nonsense I didn't write. P. Glińska still in Dresden. Józia is also waiting for me there, and here I don't know when I will be able to go. Adieu, my dear Frycek - sincerely loving you. O lover, now you have to find out even more carefully. [1] Kepsach (Keep sake) - sheet music portfolio. \r\n"
"Mom scolded, so I thank you, thank you very much, and when we see each other, I will thank you even nicer. Know that I am very lazy to write, because this postponing until see relieves me of a lot of words now. Mom described our way of life, so I have nothing new to report; sinon qu'il dég?le: grande nouvelle, n'est-ce pas? Surtout tr?s importante ? savoir. Cette vie tranquille que nous menons ici est ce qu'il me faut, voil? pourquoi je l'aime pour ? present, s'entend, car je ne voudrais pas que ce f?t toujours comme cela. On prend son parti le mieux qu'on peut, quand cela ne peut pas ?tre autrement que cela n'est. Je m'occupe un peu pour tuer le temps. J'ai dans ce moment l'Allemagne de Heine qui m'intéresse infiniment. Mais il faut finir et vous recommender a dieu. J'esp?re que je n'ai pas besoin de vous répéter l'assurance des sentiments de votre fid?le secrétaire. [1] Mary. [1] Sinon... secrétaire (French) - I guess we're having a thaw: great news, isn't it? Especially so important to inform about it. I need the quiet life we lead here, so I like it now; I wouldn't want it to be like that, of course. We have to accept it as much as possible, since it cannot be otherwise. I do anything to pass the time. I currently have Heine's Germany in my hands, which interests me immensely. But I must conclude and commend you to God's grace. I hope there is no need to repeat the assurance of your faithful secretary's affection."
"Dear Fryderyk! The first and fifth day of March is coming and I can't hug you. There is no happiness on earth that would not rush to my head and heart for you at that moment, dear Frycia, so I don't know where to start and what to wish you: supposedly I only ask God not to let you out of his holy place. care and poured out all blessings. – Mrs. Wodzińska told me that you promised her to go to bed early, which made me very happy, because it is necessary for your health; but you didn't keep your word to her. Particularly now, when the flu is so strong and untimely, and a cold are the greatest reasons for the easy acquisition of this disease! beware of them, dear child, and especially colds. Write to us often, because believe me that when a month passes and there is no letter from you, each of us deceives the other and finds reasons explaining why you do not write to satisfy each other, and in our souls they think something else. How good it is that this goddess of the future probably promises everyone a happy one. I believe that you were curious to see her, but you had too much courage to listen to her oracle, because, despite the greatest sense, if she had told you anything about which you were dissatisfied, she might have made you uneasy for a time. So give me your word, dear Fritz, that you won't visit her again. I have nothing to report to you, because whatever you may care about, the sisters report to you. We are waiting impatiently for your letter again, dear Fryciu. Be calm about us, protect your health, which contributes the most to our happiness. I hug you from my soul, most affectionate Mother. \r\n"
"Dear Chopin. Believe me, when I tell the Lord that I love Him, I have more, in spite of appearances, more regard for You than for myself, which proves that I am not afraid to bother You again. But really, for the last time, I urge the Lord to follow my advice. you are ill; Worse yet, you could become much more seriously ill. The Lord is coming to the end of the anguish of the soul and the sufferings of the body; when cares of the heart turn into sickness, we are lost; My point is to prevent this from happening to you. I am not trying to console you, I respect your feelings, which I can only guess, but I want them to remain feelings and not turn into physical suffering. It is a duty to live when, like the Lord, one has within oneself the source of life and poetry; may the Lord not lose this treasure and do not treat the good God lightly, disregarding his most precious gifts. It would be an unforgivable crime, because God Himself will not return the past voluntarily wasted by the Lord. To preserve this past full of future, you must decide on one thing: let yourself be treated as a child and as a sick person; let yourself be convinced that you have only one goal now: your health - the rest will come back by itself. I have enough friendship for the Lord that the Lord will allow me to get to the heart of the matter. Does money keep you in Paris? If so, I can lend them to you, you will return them to me later, and yet you will rest during these three months!!! If you feel a lack of love, let at least friendship work; live for you and for us; you will soon become richer. Three months of rest and prudent, ongoing treatment will suffice to prevent disease; but it's necessary. Anxiety of spirit will haunt you in solitude, it is true, but physical rest will be given to the soul, and the wings of talent will carry you to worlds that allow you to forget about ours. Liberate yourself from the routine of your Parisian life; with me, an opportunity that is hard to find awaits you: a month of living in the countryside in the right conditions, then a journey to the banks of the Rhine. Ignatius will ride my horses all the way to Strasbourg; if this way of traveling is too slow for you, we will find another; on the Rhine you are as if in Ems, and from there everywhere, because a stay in Ems, well used, is health! ... I have already spoken about all this with you, but my friendship forces me to repeat it once more. Please do not answer me otherwise, only that on Tuesday or Wednesday next week you will live at Saint-Gratien, where you will be as free as I am, and even more so, since you will not have to perform the petty duties of the master of the house. I'm pestering you for the last time, but that doesn't need an explanation, does it? Lady Merlin has come to hear from you, but she understands and grieves over the reason for your departure. A. de Custine. \r\n"
 use Mrs. Nakwaska's permission to assign a few words. I expect handwritten messages from Antoni. I will send you an even more special letter than the one in which Wincenty wrote. I am begging you to give him peace. So far, everyone is sitting in the city. We do not have any details, because each of the authors writes about themselves in particular. Probably already my letter from this month in Służewo and reassured you as much as possible about this Spaniard who must, must write me a few words. I will not elaborate on how much I was saddened by the news of the loss of your Mother - not for her, because I did not know, but for you - whom I know. (Consistency!) I must admit that I had a moment like the one in Marienbad with P. Maria's book, on which I would not have written anything for 100 years. There are days I don't know. Today I would rather be in Służewo than writing to Służewo. I would say more than I would write. My respect to Mr. Wodziński, Miss Maria, Kazi, Teresa, Feliks - F. Ch. \r\n
Most Gracious Lady! Well, a few words from Anton. – I hasten to send you this testimony of his health and good thoughts. – Without waiting for a reply from Służewo, I will immediately write back to him, according to his wishes – I will not mention the domestic sadness – and I will probably receive a detailed letter – how, where and what he thinks (which I will send again like this one). I'm not writing anything else, because I don't want to leave the post office - anyway, everything would pale next to Antoni's note. The most affectionate F. Ch. To Mr. Wodz[inski], my respect. I remind Mrs. Maria to attribute a few words to her brother - Kazia and Teresia, hugs, bows to Feliks. \r\n
My darling life! Wounded - far from us - and I can't send you anything at this moment... Yours are only thinking and thinking about you... For God's sake, just get well and come back. The logs say that your legion is completely [destroyed]. Don't join the Spanish army... [Remember] that your blood may be useful for something better... Tytus wrote to me to go with him somewhere in Germany. I got flu again in the winter and they're sending me to Ems. I can't think yet because I can't move. I am writing and cooking a manuscript. I think of you more than you think, and I love you as always. FC [ By the way ] Believe me, I remember about you as about Tytus... Maybe I'll go to George Sand for a few days, but it won't be late for your money, because I'll leave instructions for Jaś for those three days. \r\n
"Most Gracious Lady! Anthony in Zaragoza; in good health, he wrote to me these days and begs me to remind you of him. “Their legion is completely disorganized after the skirmish at Huesca; many are returning, and if ever, then now they need urgent help from the State. As much as I could, I responded to his wishes last month (immediately after receiving the letter before Huesca that I sent you), but it's a drop in the ocean. Vincent and Maurice are also in Zaragoza; the last guardian advises them to return; it would be good if he could come back with them when he left. Meanwhile, when there is poverty and turmoil in the neighbourhood, weddings, balls and festivities do not bother here. They play so much that they suffocate and trample themselves; at the firework on the Champ de Mars, dozens of people died of curiosity in the crowd, which was the reason for postponing the ball ? l'hôtel de ville [1], for which over 15,000 tickets were distributed. The new princess is widely liked; they do not praise her beauty, but her wit; she doesn't do any gosseries [2] and she's not embarrassed, as if she grew up between such festivals (and not in Ludwigsburg on buttersznitach). – I have not been anywhere: not even in Versailles, about which the miracles not only of Philip, but also friends of the last dynasty talk about. It exceeded everyone's expectations. The weather was favorable for ceremonies; everything went well except for the soups at the dinner of Versailles, for which the maître d'hôtel had the king wait. It was feared that the cook would not follow Vatel's example. The Parisians are still waiting for the national guard ball at the Opera and the feast that Rothschild gives to the young duchy at ? Ferri?re, his very beautiful village near Paris. And in Służewo, is it a beautiful summer? Is there a lot of shade? Can you sit under trees and paint? Does Teresa have a comfortable place for cheesecakes? Doesn't she miss Miss Józefa or Miss Malet? Don't they think to see them soon? I would have thousands of questions. I'm curious, except for festivals. When the Duchess entered, I was in the country by Lake Enghien. It's hard for me to sit still in Paris. My doctor is sending me to Ems, and I do not yet know where and when I will go. In those days, Mrs. Zofia once visited me in the evening with Duchess Zajączkowa and cordially inquired about you. Didn't your ears ring? Mrs. Anat[olowa] yesterday with the Platers; she complains a bit about her nerves, but she's gaining weight anyway, and Leosia is growing beautifully. Guermange Teresi cannot forget and whenever she sees my goddaughter (you must know that I have been godfather here for a long time), whenever she hears her, she always ends her ecstasies with madmozel il . Did you like the piano? God would give! If not, please kill me, and don't be angry. I remind you once again that Antoś is waiting (and I will also get a few words). The most attached F. Chopin. My respect to Mr. Wodziński. Miss Maria, Kazi, Teresa, Feliks, what belongs to whom. [1] A l'hôtel de ville (French) – in the town hall. [2] Goszeria (from French gaucherie) – clumsiness, tactlessness."
"You have been to Enghien, and they assure me that you are to return there: I hope you will not give me the indignity of staying with me. You may drink the waters at Saint-Gratien as well as at Enghien, and I will have you taken to your bath every morning; they are a quarter of an hour from me. Besides, I have many things to tell you about London, and I think you will find them pleasant. We are almost alone, so you would have complete freedom. Besides, you know how nice it is always for me to see you; Ignacy joins me in persuading you to come, and I renew my assurance of discretion in every case, because I want you to feel good with me. Please accept the assurances of the warmest feelings. A. de Custine. You must write to me at No. 6 rue Rochefoucauld Paris; but I expect you will come here without notice."
"My life. Thanks to you for Koźmian - without him there would be no London for me. – Thanks to you for the letters – without them I would be sighing again and again – but may all the devil take you with the mud here, which you thought was dry. ""Greshhon muddy!"" – Then I will tell you how many pleasant thoughts and how many unpleasant tastes the sea has driven me – then I will also tell you the impression of this sooty Italian sky on my heavily resembling columns of gray air bearing down my nose – I will also leave the rest for later, and now I will only tell you that I it's very respectable fun, you can tell Jaś that it's easy to play carefully here - when you stay for a short time. – Huge stuff!! - Large urinals. ""But there's nowhere to go to sleep."" - But English women, but horses, but palaces, but carriages, but wealth, but splendour, but place, but trees, but everything from soap to razors, everything extraordinary - all the same, everything educated, everything washed and black as noble d...!!! – I kiss you on the face Koźmian adds that Duppy is here for signs that are detached!!! Praise London now. \r\n"
Well, when can't I?!!! I would have slaughtered myself with those MacDaniel's razors that I brought you, if I hadn't thought of returning them to you first. I have a musical dinner which I can't get away with for all my screechiness. I hug you like a boa Ch.
"Most Gracious Lady! Fearing that someone from the side will not report the untruth, I prefer to send Antoś's letter from the 3rd bm, so that you can know from his own handwriting what he is doing. I did not write that he was slightly wounded in the leg at Huesca, because it was around May, and I would rather say how to be frightened by writing; but when it happened otherwise and this fly can report to you as a giant elephant, so I attach his latest letter, in which he writes that the wound is completely healed. This letter also shows that he intends to return, and for the three thousand francs that I received on the 9th of the month from the banker Leo, and on the day of arrival of the attached Antoni's letter, that is, on the 10th of the month, I sent to Logronio via Rothschild. There are many of our people in Logronio, and especially he will find the good Woroniecki there. It will be more lively for him if, by the grace of their Lady or Miss Maria, they will pass a few words into my hands; because as you can see, he also complains in this letter that no one writes to him from home, despite the fact that I have always informed him about you whenever I have news. Your last letter reached me in London, where I had languished for more than a month. I thought that from there I would go through Holland to Germany... I came home, the time is late and it will probably be late for me in my room. – I am waiting for a less sad letter from you than the last one. Maybe my future will be just an assignment to Antosiowy. The most attached F. Chopin. I pay my respects to Mr Wodziński. I remind Miss Maria of her brother. Feliks, Kazi, Miss Józef, Teresa... Your friends staying here are healthy and certainly do not think about illness or sorrows. Mrs. Zofia was supposed to have received news from Geneva that you were expected there. \r\n"
Would His Majesty send the piano to Mrs. Potocka (aunt) tomorrow evening? Nobody but me will play it. Sincerely devoted to Ch. Mr. Potocka, rue de Berlin No 2 (at rue de Londres)
 I replied to you at Versailles that I was expecting you this evening at 8 and ?. Ch.
 I can only write a few words to you to thank you for the beautiful portfolio you sent me. I will not try to describe to the Lord how much joy I experienced in receiving it, it would be in vain. Please accept the assurance of gratitude that I owe you. Please believe in the attachment that our whole family has for the Lord, especially his worst student and childhood friend. Adieu. Mom hugs the Lord most tenderly. Teresia keeps mentioning her Chopin every now and then. Adieu, may the Lord remember us. Maria.
"My good Frederick! It's been a long time since I reported to you, but that's why you were a constant object of my care. How is your health now? I had a letter from Ludwika, who is better than us on this point: she had news. If that's the case, I'm very happy, but please tell us honestly how you're doing. In the hope of your inestimable heart, I am sending a letter to Ant[oś] at your address; he did not write where it will stand, please give it to him, and accept the assurances of the most kind feelings, which I will keep until I die. T. Wodzińska."
 Please, do not refuse me tomorrow, Thursday, dinner with Witwicki and Grzymała. I'll be waiting for you at my place at 5 3/4. – If you have nothing better to do that evening, then let me introduce you to Mrs. Marliani, where you will see some interesting people. So I'm waiting for you tomorrow. F. Chopin. \r\n
"How is it that the piano sylph is supposed to be heard, and I find out about it from people? That `s bad; if you know me, judge yourself! Would you please send me two tickets? I would like to ask for more, but I am away from the world and everything. A thousand words of old friendship and a hundred thousand new grudges. A. de C. What does the trip they announce mean? Where are you actually leaving?"
 Dear Mr. de Trémont, I will be with you the day after tomorrow at 3 to rehearse my concert. Thousands of cordial greetings. FF. Chopin.
"Dear Chopin! You reminded me of the most beautiful days in Saint-Gratien and in Paris; I found you, and with you, the piano without its negative sides, without tones for tones, with thoughts that you express despite the instrument, because you play not on the piano, but on the soul. You impressed me like in the best of times. I wish I was dying; The Lord would resurrect me, because then the Lord would come, I still believe it!... There is nothing like friends like the Lord! it is not difficult to please them, their success is self-generated: I send an article about them to the press and hear in reply: is that all? we can say much more about it; they say to all their friends: go to a Chopin concert, and everyone says: we have had tickets for eight days, and we ask for them in vain for our friends: there are no more!... Poland is unhappy as a whole, but each of her children has her own a star that rewards him for his public misfortune. I am going away for a very long time and a long way, and I could not bear this new distance if I hoped to hear the Lord often like last night. You have attracted by the charm of your refinement all true lovers and all that is refined in Paris; the composition of the auditorium was wonderful; but when I listen to you, I always feel alone with you, maybe even with something better than you, or at least with what is best in you. Sorry for all the chatter; but these are the things I wanted to tell you, and I wouldn't dare say it to your face. You know that you do with me what you will, and yet you refused to believe that you had the same power over many others; I am angry for myself and glad for you, seeing to what extent you have been unjust to the public. A. de Custine."
"Forgive me, good Frederick, for breaking your silence, but I need to know about your health. This winter I have often seen your parents and your sister; healthy everyone. Father coughs a bit. I still have a request for you, and this is that you encourage Niemcewicz's Songs to be reprinted in Paris, now he will not get these here for any money. Make a different music to them, beautiful engravings, and there will be an ass unheard of, because everyone will buy it in Poznań. With your zeal, you will certainly accomplish a lot and I will hope that you will write me back, that is, my project accepted or not, and above all, that is, your health in good condition and what circuit your person is. God bless you. TW"
" My life, send me through my old woman - Pacini Liszt; I'll give it to you in a few hours. \r\n"
 I love the Lord. George. Me too! and me too! and me too!!! Marie Dorval.
My life! I cannot be surpris [1] because yesterday I saw Margo, who told me about her arrival. I stay at home until 5 o'clock and give stone lessons (I'm already finishing the second one). What will come of it, God knows. I'm really bad. I used to go to you every day to hug you. Let's eat dinner together somewhere. Ch. [1] Surpris (French) – surprised, surprised. \r\n
 My darling, I must see you today, though at night, at 12 o'clock or at 1 o'clock. Do not be afraid of any troubles for you, my darling. You know that I can always treasure your heart. This is for advice for me. Your Ch.
"Ignacy tells me that you, dear Chopinet, cannot come today, on Sunday, but that you will come on Wednesday. Lord knows that you alone can come here by fate, being sure that you will always bring joy; so I announce once and for all, never ask if you can come, and come whenever you please. If you come on Wednesday, you should stay a few days, if not - a few hours, finally, if you like, just come. The Lord inspired a scene in my book, May the Lord Come to rescue me from the clutches of a routine into which I have fallen and from which I will not get out unless the Lord inspires me. Let the Lord play for us what you have created new, and improvise what you will create. Above all, however, don't consider yourself bound to anything but one thing: to love me, but that's where the difficulty lies!!! It is so easy for me to love that God should have added to this unfortunate faculty the faculty of arousing love; in fact, quite the opposite is happening; that is why Mrs. Gay says that love is leprosy, and that, unfortunately, it is not contagious. We saw Mrs. Girardin so sad it breaks the heart. He leaves for Berry; and you? shrouded in mystery genius, why do you treat me like those you don't tell? I got a lovely letter from Jules Janin yesterday. At least this one is honest. For his genius is a huge dose of intelligence, and innate intelligence is always kind. That's why the Lord is like this, if someone can stop you. I have no doubt that at the moment you are kind to someone, why not to us? By Wednesday then, I hope; I don't think Mrs. Pleyel will have time that day; you should make her meet here on Sunday, and spend the July holiday here, for Paris will then be unbearable. Cordiality A. de C. Did you know that there are two vehicles a day to Saint-Gratien? One leaves at 10am, the other at 4pm from rue B.-G. Saint-Denis No. 25. I give you this means of transport, because once you are here, I will try to make you late and have to spend the night. \r\n"
 received from Mr. Maurycy Schlesinger the sum of four hundred francs for the account of one thousand five hundred francs, for which I sold him the ownership rights to France of the 4 Mazurkas opus [33] and three Waltzes for piano with the ownership rights to France and Germany. FF. Chopin.
"To Mr. F. Chopin about his Polish Ballad. Dear Sir! Once, during one of those evenings when, surrounded by the sympathy of the elect, you gave yourself entirely to your inspiration, you played the Polish Ballad that we love so much. No sooner had the genius of melancholy, enchanted in his instrument, known the only hands that have the power to give him speech, and began to utter his hidden sufferings, when we were plunged into a deep dream. And when the Lord had finished, we were silent for a long time, lost in thought, still hearing a wonderful song, the last note of which had long ago faded into space. So what did we all dream about together and what thoughts did the melodious voice of your piano evoked in our souls? I can't answer that, because in music, just like in the clouds, everyone sees something different. I watched our old friend the Skeptic, who nevertheless kept such a lively faith in love and art, sat staring forward, with his head bent over his shoulder and a sad smile on his lips, and I imagined he dreamed of the gurgling brooks and the sad farewells exchanged in the shadowy forest alleys; I also saw the old Believer, whose evangelical words we listen to with respectful admiration, sitting with his hands folded, his eyes closed and his brow furrowed, seem to ask his grandfather Dante about the mysteries of heaven and the fate of the world. And I, hidden in the darkest corner of the room, wept, following in my mind the sad images which the Lord conjured before me. Returning home, I tried to express them in my own way in the following lines. May you read them with indulgence, and even if I misinterpret His Ballad, accept this sacrifice as proof of my feelings for you and compassion for your heroic homeland."
"My baby! I am in Palma, among palms, cedars, cacti, olives, oranges, lemons, aloes, figs, pomegranates, etc. Everything Jardin des Plantes has in its ovens. Sky like turquoise, sea like azure, mountains like emerald, air like heaven. In the day the sun, everyone walks summer, and hot; at night guitars and singing all hours long. Huge balconies with grapes overhead; moorish walls. Everything towards Africa, like the city, is looking. In other words, a wonderful life. Love me. Go to Pleyel, because the piano hasn't arrived yet. By what route did they send him? You will get Preludes soon. I will probably live in a wonderful monastery, the most beautiful position in the world: sea, mountains, palm trees, cemetery, Teutonic church, ruins of mosques [1], thousand-year-old olive trees. And, my life, I live a little more... I am close to the most beautiful. I'm better... Give my parents the letters to Grzymala and whatever you want to send me: he knows the most reliable address. Hug Jasia. As if he had recovered here! Tell Pl[eyel] he'll get the manuscript soon. Don't tell your friends about me. I'll write you a lot later... Say that I'll be back after the winter. The post office leaves here once a week. I am writing through the consulate here. Send my letter to your parents as it is. Post it yourself. Your Ch. I'll write to Jason later. [Below Fontana's note: ""pick up. 28 (November 1838)"". In addition, a note by Wojciech Grzymała, who sent the letter back to Fontana: ""I hasten to send you a letter and write me a word when your answer is ready, so that I can delay mine to it. Sincerely accommodating Alb. Grzymała.”] [1] Mosque (from French mosquée) – a mosque"
"Dear friend. I came to Palma, a lovely country - eternal spring - olive trees, orange trees, lemon trees, palm trees, etc., etc. My health has improved, how are you? I was sorry to leave without really knowing what was wrong with you. Please do not leave me without news for a long time - I am so far away - and tell me if you have fully recovered. Please, let me also write something about your family. Goodbye, Dearest, respects to your Mother and many kindnesses to Mr. and Mrs. Denoyers. Ch. Please address the letters to: Mr. chargé des affaires étrang?res ? Marseille to be sent to the Consul of France in Barcelona (and in an envelope) to Mr. Chopin in Palma de Mallorca. The piano hasn't arrived yet. ""How did you send him?"" via Marseille or via Perpignan? I dream about music, but I don't play - because there are no pianos here... it's a wild country in this respect. \r\n"
"[A note on George Sand's letter to Grzymała] She asks, my life, not to put this in any journal, because she would have trouble with Buloz. She thinks it's probably for some Kacper, which you can easily do, e.g. Bradi dedaur .&nbsp; &ndash; whatever&nbsp; &ndash; don't make her uncomfortable with Buloz.&nbsp; &ndash; We love you and hug you, and advise you to restore your health in one breath, without which you do not live.&nbsp; &ndash; once again&nbsp; &ndash; I remind you, don't expose her.&nbsp; &ndash; Weary, she rests and has given me the command to ask You for this. What are these Spanish brags in Paris.&nbsp; &ndash; You can see how mails go here and how easy correspondence is.&nbsp; &ndash; &nbsp;My fort. I haven't and probably won't in a year. Love me anyway. Ch."
"My Julian! Do not give the congé [1] to my apartment, nor can I send you the manuscript, for I have not finished it. I've been sick these last two weeks like a dog: I caught a cold despite the 18 degrees heat, pink, orange. palms and fig. 3 of the island's most famous doctors: one smelled what I spat, another tapped where I spat from, a third felt and listened to me spat. One said I was dead, the second said I was dying, the third said I would die. And today, as always, I can't forgive Jaś for not giving me any consultation in the case of bronchite aiguë [2], which he could always expect from me. I could scarcely stop them from letting me bleed, and they didn't put up any visicatories or make cadavers, and today I am the old way for Providence. This, however, affects the Preludes that God knows when you'll get. I will live in a few days in the most beautiful place in the world: the sea, the mountains, whatever you want. I will live in an old, huge, abandoned, ruined Carthusian monastery, which Mend[izabel] drove out as if for me. Near Palma, nothing more wonderful: cloisters, most poetic cemeteries, in a word, I will be fine there. I don't have a piano yet. “I wrote to Pleyel, rue de Rochechouard, straight ahead. Find out... Tell me that I fell ill the next day, that I am well again. Anyway, don't say much about me or the manuscripts. Write to me: I haven't received any letter from you yet. – Tell Leon that I haven't sent Albrecht's Preludes yet, that I love them very much and will write to them. Drop my letter to Rodz yourself. on board and write. I hug Jasia. Ch. Don't tell people I was sick or they'll make a story. [Fontana's note: ""pick up. 3 Jan. (1839)”.] [1] Do not give congé (French) – do not say my apartment. [2] Bronchite aiguë (French) – acute bronchitis. [3] Grâce (French) – thanks."
"My darling, send Fontana a letter to Parents. I am coughing and grunting, loving you. We remember you often. There has been no letter from you yet. It is a devilish country as far as post, people and comfort are concerned. The sky is as beautiful as your soul; earth as black as my heart. I love you forever. Ch. [George Sand - Translation] Dear, do you receive our letters? We have written to you three or four times, and your silence disturbs and saddens us. However, we have messages from the Marlianis. The surest way of writing to us out of all we have tried is to address Mr. Canut y Mugnerot in Palma, Mallorca, Balearic Islands. In the envelope: for Mrs. GS It is necessary to pay up to the border. Chopin has been suffering quite a bit over the last few days. He is much better now, although he suffers a bit from the temperature changes that are common here. We'll have L'Homond's fireplace at last, and may Providence watch over us, for there are no doctors or medicines here. Maurice feels very well. The lack of a piano worries me a lot because of the small one. He hired a local who annoys him more than soothes him. Still, it works. In three days we will live in a beautiful Hermitage, wonderfully situated. We bought furniture and here we are in Mallorca. The country is delightful and we are happy; we lack nothing but you. With pain and stupefaction we learned about the misfortune of Mickiewicz's wife. My God! My God! You can always count on me for a known article and a second one for the vent. But, unfortunately, I haven't finished Spiridion yet. I can't work yet. We are not yet set up, we have neither donkey, nor servant, nor water, nor fire, nor sure means of sending manuscripts. So I do cooking instead of literature; I don't know yet if the last package I sent Buloz got through. Be so kind as to see him and tell him that the fourth part of Spiridion goes to him if he hasn't already received it. There is a great uproar in Spain at the moment. Perhaps the one carrying Spiridion could not reach the Pyrenees. Communicating with France... [No further continuation.]"
"My Julian. I haven't heard from you yet, and this is my third letter, if not my fourth. Have you franked? Maybe mine didn't write? Maybe misfortune got in my way? Are you lazy? No, you are not lazy and honest. Certainly my two letters to my messengers (both from Palma) and you wrote to me, only the local post office, the most irregular in the world, did not report. Today I just received news that 1 Decemb. in Marseilles, they loaded the piano onto a merchant ship. The letter from Marseilles took 14 days to arrive. I hope that the piano will winter in the port or at anchor (because no one here moves like rain) and that I will get it only when I leave, which will make me very happy, because apart from 500 francs of duty, I will have the pleasure of packing it back myself. ""Meanwhile, my manuscripts are asleep, and I can't sleep, I just cough, and I've been covered with band-aids for a long time, I'm waiting for spring or something... Tomorrow I'm going to that wonderful monastery of Valdemosa to write in the cell of an old monk, who perhaps had more fire in his soul than and suppressed it, and suppressed it, and extinguished it, for it had it in vain. – I think to send you my Preludes and Ballade soon. Stay with Leon. Don't say I'm sick, or he'd be scared by 1000. And at Pleyel. Your Ch. Jasia. \r\n"
"or rather Valdemosa, a few miles away; between the rocks and the sea, an abandoned huge Carthusian monastery, where in one cell with a door, like never before in Paris, you can imagine me uncoiffled, without white gloves, as pale as ever. The cell is in the form of a high coffin, the vault is huge, dusty, the window is small, oranges, palm trees, cypresses are in front of the window; opposite the window, my bed on straps, under a filigree Moorish rose. Next to the bed, there is an old, untouchable [1] square writing-clack [2], barely used for writing, on it a lead candlestick (great lux here) with a candle. Bach, my scribbles and not mine scribbles... hush... you can scream... still hush. In short, I am writing to you from a strange place. I received your letter from the 2nd of this month the day before, and since it is a holiday and the post office does not leave until next week, they are writing to you slowly, and this promissory note I am sending you will probably be sent to you by the Russian month. Nature is a beautiful thing, but you don't have to deal with people anymore. No roads, no post office. I've been here many times from Palma, always with the same carter, always by a different route. Streams make roads, avalanches [3] repair them, today you can't drive there, because they are plowed, tomorrow only mules can, and what kind of carriages are there?!?! Therefore, Julian, there is not a single Englishman, not even a consul. What are they saying about me, baby. – Leo the Jew! I cannot send you the Preludes because they are infinite; I'm feeling better and I'll hurry up, and I'll write a short open letter to the Jew, thanking him until he's at his heels (let him go where you want). Rogue! and I was the eve of my departure with him, so that he would not send me. Schlesing. an even bigger dog to put my Waltzes in an album! and to sell to Probst, when I gave him to Berlin for his begging for Father. “All those lice bite me less now. Let Leo get mad. I only feel sorry for you, but in a month you will be clean with Leon and my host. Use Wessel money as needed. What does the servant do? Give the porter 20 francs. from me on New Year's Day, when you collect the money, and pay the fumist [4] if he comes. I don't know if I left important debts. In any case, I promise you, we'll be clean in a month or so. - The moon is beautiful today. He never was. But but. You write to me that you have sent me a letter from mine; neither saw nor received. And so I need it. Have you franked? How did you address? Your only letter com so far now received was badly addressed. Junto [5] don't write without something forgotten and this gentleman (big dick en parenth?se [6] ) is called Riotord. I send you the best address*. The piano has been waiting in the port for 8 days for what Duana [7] will say, who wants mountains of gold for this crap. Here nature is benevolent, but men are thieves, for they never see strangers, so they do not know what to demand for what. Oranges for free, and the button for pants is crazy sums. All this was played [8] on the sand with this sky, with this poetry that everything breathes here, with this color of the most wonderful places, still not obliterated by people's eyes. Few people scare away those eagles, which are swinging above our heads every day. Write, for God's sake, always frank and add Palma de Mallorca. I am sending you a promissory note and a letter to mine. I love Jasia and I regret that he was not completely educated on the direction of charity children in Nürenberg or Bamberg. Let him write to me that a man. This seems to be the 3rd or 4th letter I send you to your parents. Hug Albrecht, but say little. Your Ch. * Words crossed out: ""However, I would prefer that you address my piano where I am."" [1] Nitouchable (French) - untouchable, easily subversive. [2] Klak - trash - useless equipment. [3] AwaIanż (from French avalanche) – an avalanche. [4] Fumista (French: fumiste) – zdun. [5] Junto (Spanish) - together; So. [6] En parenth?se (French) – here: by the way. [7] Duana (properly Spanish aduana) – customs office. [8] Grano (Spanish) – grain."
Dear friend, if you have your Moscheles Sonata for 4 hands, send it to me. Chopin.
"Dear friend. I am sending you at last my Preludes finished on your piano, which arrived in the best condition - neither the sea, nor the bad weather, nor the customs office in Palma harmed it. I have instructed Fontana to give you my manuscript. I want fifteen hundred francs for him for France and England. Probst, as you know, has purchased property for Haertel in Germany for a thousand francs. I have no obligations to Wessel in London; he can pay more. Please send this money to Fontana by the way; I don't want to collect debts from you here because I don't know any banker in Palma. Since you, dearest, wanted to take on this serfdom and become my publisher, I must warn you that there are still manuscripts at your disposal: 1-o Ballade (also covered by the contract with Probst for Germany). For this Ballad I would like a thousand francs for France and England. 2-for two Polonaises (of which you know one, A major) - for them I demand fifteen hundred francs for all countries of the globe. 3rd Scherzo - the same price as for the Polonaises, for the whole of Europe. If you wish, all this will begin to fall on your head every month until the author returns, who will then tell you more than he can write. I had news of you only through Fontana; He wrote to me that you are feeling better. The post office here is wonderfully organized. I've been waiting for a letter from my friends from Warsaw for three months! And how is your family, Mrs. Pleyel, Mr. and Mrs. Denoyers? Please give them my best wishes for the year 39. I am waiting for a letter from you, even if it is small, tiny and I love you as always. Sincerely devoted to FF. Chopin. Please excuse the spelling. I noticed that I had not yet thanked the Lord for the piano, and that I was only writing about money. ""I'm definitely a business man!"" [Addition in a foreign hand: ""Replied March 19, 1839.""]"
"My baby. I am sending you the Preludes. Rewrite, You and Wolff; I don't think there are any errors. You will give the transcript to Probst and the manuscript to Pleyel. Probsta, you will take the money to which you have a ticket and reçu [1] immediately to Leon, until which time I cannot write with thanks, and from the money that Pleyel will give you, that is, 1500 francs, you will pay rent 425 francs. until the New Year and pronounce the room politely. If you get hired for March, that's fine, if not, you have to keep a quarter more. Thousand that you have left, you will give to Nougi from me. You will learn about his apartment from Jaś, but do not tell him anything about money, because he is ready for Noug. storm, and I don't want anyone but you and me to know about it. If the boarding house was hired, some of the furniture would go to Jaś, some to Grzym. Tell Pleyel to write letters through you. I sent you a promissory note for Wessel before New Year's. Tell Pleyel that I am quita with Wessel. In a few weeks you will get the Ballade, Polonaises and Scherzo. Tell Pleyel to arrange the publication of the Preludes with Probst. I haven't received any letter from my parents yet! You need to frank. But don't you know what happened to the first letter? I hug you. I live in a cell, sometimes I have Arabian balls, the African sun, the Mediterranean. Hug the Albrechts, I will write to them. Don't say that I'm throwing the lodging, just Grzymale. I don't know, but maybe I won't be back until May or later. To Pleyel himself the letter and the Prelude. give back. Your F. Write. \r\n [1] Reçu (French) – receipt."
"My Julian. You must have learned from Grzymała about the state of my health and about my manuscripts. Two months ago I sent you my Preludes from Palma. Of these you were to (after copying them for Probst) give Leon a thousand, and of the thousand and five hundred that Pleyel was to give you for the Preludes - I wrote you to pay Nougi and term [1] one of the host. In the same letter, if I am not mistaken, I asked you to terminate the room, which, if not rented for April, will have to be held until the next trimester (Juillet, I believe). – You probably used Wessl's money to pay for the New Year's trimester, and if not, always use it to pay for an apartment for that period. – The second manuscript must have reached you only now, because in the chamber and at sea, and again in the chamber, they sat for a long time. – I wrote to Pleyel on the Preludes that I would give him the Ballade (which Probst has for Germany) for a thousand; for Polonaises 2 (for France, England and Germany, because the Probsta engagement ends with the Ballad [3]) I demanded one thousand five hundred. ""I don't think it's too expensive."" ""Then you should get two thousand five hundred from Pleyel for the second manuscripts, and five hundred from Probst for the Ballad (or six hundred, I don't remember well), which makes three thousand."" - I asked Grzymała to send me at least five hundred at once - this does not prevent me from sending the rest in a hurry. ""Well, that's my business."" Now, if, which I doubt, the boarding house will be rented from next month - you will dismantle my furniture in threes: Grz., Jaś and Ty. Jaś has the most space, although not the most oil in his head, according to a children's letter he wrote to me, thinking that I would become a Camaldolese [letter damaged]. Don't embarrass Grzymała too much... [damage to the letter] take whatever you need - because I don't know if I will return to Paris in the summer (keep it safe). – For ... [damage] I will write to myself and if I have to keep my apartment until June, which I expect, I am asking you, although you will have your own other apartment, stay with me, because I will charge you with paying the last trimester. – To your sincere and true letter, you have the answer in the second Polonaise – it is not my fault that I am like that mushroom, similar to champignon, which is poisonous, if you dig it up from the ground and taste it, taking it for something else – I know that I never mean anything to anyone it was useful - but also not much for myself. I told you that in the desk, in the first drawer from the door, there is a quarter that either you or Grz. or Jaś could unseal; now I am asking you to take it out and burn it without reading it - do it, I beseech you on friendship - this page is not needed today. – If Antek is going and does not send me the money, it will be very Polish – bad Polish, nb. - don't tell him about it though. See Pleyel - tell him I haven't heard a word from him. - That his piano is safe. Does he agree to the deals I wrote him? ""Letters from home, together with yours, reached me all three together just before embarking."" I'm sending you one more. Thank you for the friendly help you give me in need. Hug Jasia; tell him that I am on my own, or rather that I have not been allowed to bleed, that I have a visage, that I cough a little, only in the morning, and that I am not yet considered consumptive. – I don't drink coffee or wine - only milk; I keep warm and I look like a lady. Send money as soon as possible - put up with Grzymała. Your Fr. I combine you with 2 words for Antek. – I am writing to Grzymała tomorrow. [1] Term - here: quarterly installment of the rent. [2] To juillet (French juillet) - until July. [3] Engagement (French) – here: contract; commitment."
"Jews always Jews and Schwabs with Schwabs - that's true, but what can I do - I have to deal with them. Thank you, darling, once again for your kindness, and after the instructions given to Fontana today, I doubt I'll have to pounce on you a second time. My health is getting better and better - veterinarians, diet, fees [?], pills, baths, and besides, the endless care of my angel put me on my feet - a bit thin legs. You write to tell me about my projects. Well, the doctor does not want to let me out from under his eye before May-June; hence our intention is to go to Nohan [t], where the summer air is to help me a lot, and for the next winter, if finances permit - to Paris or to the south of France, if health requires it. “I lost a lot of weight and was gaunt, but now I eat out. Add to my perpetual cough all the annoyances that the Spaniards have made me, and all the pleasures like seeing her restless all the time - curing me, because the doctors there, Lord have mercy, making my bed, cleaning my room, cooking tizans, refusing everything for me - no postage - with children needing her constant eye - [word illegible] not ordinary life. Add to that he writes... [Continuation of letter unknown.]"
"Thank you, my life, for your treatments. I did not expect Jewry from Pleyel, but if so, please give him this letter. Unless you don't have any difficulties with the Ballade and Polonaises. Otherwise, after collecting 500 from Probst for the Ballad, you will take the Ballad to Schlesinger. When you have to deal with Jews, at least with the orthodox. Probst can cheat me even worse, because he's a bird you can't catch. Schlesinger was constantly tricking me: he earned enough from me and he won't refuse new earnings, only politely with him, because a Jew wants to appear as something. So if Pleyel causes the least difficulty, you will go to Schl. and you'll tell him that I'm giving him a Ballade for France and England for 800 (because he won't give you a thousand), and a Polonaise for Germany, England and France for 1,500 (and he won't want to give it, it's for 1,400 or 1,300, even 1,200). If (probst must have warned him about the Preludes) he mentions anything about them and Pleyel, you will say that it was promised to Pleyel long ago, that he wanted to be their publisher, that he asked me for it very much before leaving, as indeed it was. You see, my Life: for Pleyel I could break with Schlesinger, but for Probst I can't. What about the fact that Schlesinger Probst makes me pay more for my manuscript. If Probst pays them dearly to Schlesinger, it is a sign that he is cheating me by paying little. Probst doesn't have a warehouse in Paris, all my stuff is printed at Schl. The Jew always paid me, and Probst often kept me waiting. You will have to make an arrangement with Schlesinger that you will give him the manuscript on the day he gives you the money; if he does not want it together, you will give him the Ballade separately and the Polonaises separately, but no more than 2 weeks difference. If Schlesinger doesn't want to hear about it, then to Probst, but if he's my suitor, don't give him less than Pleyel. Then you will give my letter to Pleyel with the slightest difficulty. If, which I doubt, you left him the manuscripts of the Ballades and Polonaises, you will pick them up for Schlesinger or Probst. Scoundrels. My God, this Pleyel, my such admirer. Maybe he thinks I won't go back to Paris? I will come back and be with him with thanks, as well as with Leon. I am enclosing a note to Schlesinger in which I authorize you. – It is necessary for Antek's parents to forget each other terribly, for it to happen to him and me as it happened. Entendons-nous [1] with me that he did not give me the money before leaving. Fools and fools without feeling. – I am healthier every day; despite this, you will still pay the porter the 50 francs, which I approve very much, because the doctor from the south does not allow me to move before the summer. I picked up my grandparents yesterday. As for the glovemaker and the little tailor, they can wait, fools! What about my papers? You can leave the letters in the desk, and the sheet music to Jaś or to yourself. There are also letters on the table in the anteroom; you need to close it properly. You will seal Schlesinger's letter with a wafer. Write often. Your Ch. Hug Jasia. [1] Entendons-nous (French) – let's agree, let's accept."
" am sorry that Fontana troubled the Dear Lord with my affairs. – I thought I was authorized to address it to you, because you offered me to publish my compositions. I am writing to him today so that he will not bother you any more. I wrote you two letters from Mallorca and I regret that I have not received a reply. I learn from Fontana that you are still ill, which worries me even more than your silence; as for me, I was dangerously ill when I wrote to you; I can say that now because it's all over and I'm on my way to recovery. The piano remained in Palma. I have sold them, or nearly sold them, for twelve hundred francs which will be paid to you in Paris by PP. Canut et Mugnerot, bankers in Palma - or by me, if these gentlemen will give me this sum. I have just written to them that if they are determined to buy this piano, as they have almost definitely communicated to me, they are to pay you directly. I await their reply. In case they send me the instrument, I will take it here and have it sent to you. I intend to go back to Paris when the weather is nice there. “I am waiting for her here, where the climate is mild and where I am recuperating. Goodbye then, dearest. Sincerely, F. Chopin. My respect to the whole house."
"My baby. I'm far better off. I start to play, eat, walk and talk like everyone else; you see that I also write easily when you receive a few words from me again. But again with interest. I would very much like my Preludes to be dedicated to Pleyel (probably there is still time, because they have not been printed). A Ballada ? Mr. Robert Schuhmann [!], Polonaises for You, As They Are. Nothing to Kessler. If Pleyel doesn't want to leave the Ballade, dedicate the Preludes to Schuhmann [!]. Gaszyński was with me yesterday from Aix, the only person I received her. Because the door is closed to all lovers of music and literature. You'll tell Probst about the change of dedication when you've dealt with Pleyel. Hug Jasia. From the new money you will give Grzymala five hundred and the rest 2500 so that he can send me. Stay awake, love me and write. Forgive me if I burden you with commissions too much, but I honestly think that you are happy to do what I ask of you. Your Ch."
"My life. Thank you for all your treatments. Pleyel is a scoundrel, Probst a scoundrel (he never gave me 1000 francs for 3 manuscripts). You have probably received my long letter about Schlesinger: I want it and I am asking you to give it to Pleyel (who finds my manuscript too expensive). If I am to sell them cheaply, I prefer Schlesinger to look for new, dissimilar compounds. Since Schlesmger can always count on England, and I am even with Wessel, let him sell them to whomever he wants. The same with the Polonaises in Germany, because Probst bird: I've known him for a long time. Let Schlesinger sell them to whoever he wants, not necessarily to Probst. I don't care. He adores me because He strips me away. Only make good arrangements with him for money, and do not give manuscripts except for cash. I am sending a reconnaissance to Pleyel [1] . Fool, don't believe me or you. My God, you must deal with scoundrels! That Pleyel who said that Schlesinger paid me badly, 500 francs seems too expensive to him today. for the manuscript to each country! Well, I prefer to deal with a real Jew. And Probst scoundrel who pays me Mazurkas 300 francs! Well, the last Mazurkas brought me jumping 800. Probst 300, Schl. 400, and Wess. 100. I prefer to give my manuscript for nothing the old way, how to bow to these fools. I prefer one Jew to be humbled like three. So to Schlesinger. Unless you're done with Pleyel. Don't talk to anyone about the Scherzo. I don't know when I'll finish it, because I'm still weak and unable to write. Scoundrels, scoundrels, them and Mrs. Migneron! But the cortuna is in full swing. Perhaps Madame Migneron will be under you yet. I don't know when I'll see you yet, give Grzymała a hug and give him whatever furniture he wants, and let Jasio take the rest. I don't write to him because I have no reason to. I love him always; tell him about it and give him a hug. Wodziński still surprises me... The money from Pleyel, when you collect it, you will pay the landlady first, and you will send me 500 immediately. Hug Grzymała and Jaś. Your Fritz. I received your letter today. No letter from Pleyel. I left Pleyel Op. white because I don't know the number. [1] Reconnaissance (French) - receipt."
"My baby! I am far healthier and I can thank you more for sending me money. You know that I am surprised at your good will, but you also have a grateful soul, though not outwardly, in me. You are so good that you will accept my furniture; be so kind and pay the transfers. I risk the latter, because I know that small sums. What happens to my income, let PB defend! The fool Pl[eyel] made me bigos, but it's hard; no one has broken through the wall. I'll see you in the summer. I'll tell you how much it amuses me. Now mine has finished the most wonderful article on Goethe, Byron and Mickiewicz. You have to read to make your heart happy. I see you enjoying yourself. And everything is so true, such great observations, on a huge scale, out of necessity, without winding up or wanting to praise. Who translated, tell me. If Mić[kiewicz] wanted to raise his hand to it himself, she would most willingly look through it, and what she wrote could be printed as discours preliminaire [1] together with the translation. Everyone would read it, and many copies could be made. get rid of. She will write about it to you or Mick[iewicz]. What is your soul doing? May God give you good mood, health and strength; these are necessary things. ""What are you talking about Nourry?"" This surprised us greatly. We often take you for a walk. You won't believe how good we are in your company. Ugly Marseille; the old, not the old city: it bores us a bit. – Next month we will probably move towards Avignon, and from there to Nohant. There we will probably hug you, not by letter, but with a mustache, if your mustache of my favorites did not suffer fate. Hands and feet, but not yourself, hug. I am writing to you without dying of the highest feelings with true Camaldolese Ch. [1] Discours preliminaire (French) - preface."
"Sir. More than a month ago I received a letter from Pleyel about the piano. I delayed answering because I was still expecting to hear from you, and now I replied that you had purchased the piano for twelve hundred francs. As I have fully recovered, I will leave Marseilles immediately; as I am not going directly to Paris, I feel it is my duty to ask you, to avoid delay, to direct the payment directly to Paris to the company C. Pleyel et Cie, rue de Rochechouard No. 20; they are already forewarned. I ask you to accept the assurance of deep respect. F. Chopin."
"My dear Chopin. Some say that you are well, others that there has been a deterioration, others that they have no news of you; to end this, kindly write a few words and let me know how you are and when you will return to us. A thousand words of friendship H. Berlioz. PS Please remind me of Mrs. Sand and place at her feet the words of the greatest admiration. We recently went through a heavy opera... by Auber."
"My baby. Mar[liani] wrote to us that you were still weak and that the bloodletting was not of much use to you. Here we thought that you were quite well, as you learned from yesterday's letter; and here today such a deconfiture [1]! In the same letter, Mar[liani] also writes that it is heard that my mother is coming to Paris, worried about me. Although I do not believe it, I am writing a letter to my people (which you will send by your grace to the post office), so that they may be calm. It will be the 3rd from Marseille. If you've heard anything about it, write me a word. For my mother to leave my father, something extraordinary would have to be done. A father who is weak and needs her more than anyone else; I would not understand any such disconnection. My Angels Finish A New Romance Gabriel. He's been writing in bed all day today. You know, to love her even more, to know her as I know her today. ""I imagine how sorry you must be if you're not allowed to go out."" Why can't I be here for you together! How I would cherish you! I was taught what to cherish! And then my nurturing would be pleasing to you, because you know from what heart I have towards you. I have never been of any use to you, but now perhaps I could cherish you. Our project to Genoa seems to have changed today. Probably in the middle of May we will see each other in her village and hug. May heaven give you health as soon as possible. Hands you know who... Your Fryc. [ Postscript George Sand - Translation] \r\n \r\n Dear, get better. Send us messages about yourself. We are sad because Carlotta tells me this morning that you are still suffering. As for me, I am in the fire of inspiration. I can't get away from work. I'm giving birth to a new novel, and there will be ticks. I kiss you, we love you. [Chopin's postscript] Send my letter by dormitory post. It always happens. [1] Dekonfitura - here: an unpleasant disappointment."
"My baby. When such Jews - hold everything - until my arrival. – Preludes sold to Pleyel (I took 500 francs) – he has the right to rub the opposite part of his belly with them, but as for Ballades and Polonaises, do not sell to Schl. or Probst. I don't want to deal with any Schonenbergers in my life. ""So if you gave Probst's Ballady, take it back, even if he gives you a thousand, you'll say I asked you to hold it until I come."" We'll see when I come back. “Enough of these fools and me and you. I'm sorry, my life. ""You've been really friendly, and even now you'll have my transfer on your back."" – I am asking Grzym. to pay the costs of moving. As for the doorman, he's lying, but who can tell - let him not bark. - Jasia, give a hug, I'll write when I'm in the heat - healthier, but I'm mad; tell Jasio that he probably won't receive a single word or a penny from Antek, just like me. Adieu, I hug you. Yesterday I received your letter from Pley. and Jasioski. If you liked Clara Wieck, that's good - because the game can't be better; if you see her, bow down from me as well as to the Lord Father. I hug you and Jasia. F. Chopin."
"My darling, having received your letter yesterday that you are still not completely healthy - I hasten to inform you, to divert your sufferings even for a minute, that a new romance, which ended last night, was assigned to you. – I thank You for Your always the same heart – but I am really surprised by the news about my mother. ""If they have told some fairy tales there, it may be true that mother is going to be in distress; I think, however, that some Polish head sucked it out of his finger. What are you writing to me about Mić[kiewicz] – we did not understand each other. It is only about the last part of Forefathers' Eve - to which its preface added would make it read more, and a similar edition would be worth both French heads and Mić's pocket. - have a fair influence. - As for your idea, it is perhaps too broad today, and much to be accomplished later. – The last part of Dziady [blurred] is a whole in itself. “Her dissertation explains and clarifies it all. – And since the old translation is no longer available in bookshops – subtracting the other part of Forefathers' Eve at the beginning, and adding the Untranslated Passage, will make a decent volume. “Anyway, I'm going to Nohan[t] soon; you will come there, because it is close - it is better to find out from her in two words than from me in 30 letters what it is all about. - We can see each other in a month, if nothing comes up. I don't like donkey milk - they make me drink petit lait [1] and I need something else. ""Love me as I love you."" ""Bring word of my transfer, if you know anything."" Stay healthy and happy, remember me. Hands... you know who. Your. FCh. I feel sorry for Ossoliński. Donkeys, donkeys. – Sapieha passed this way a few days ago; George visited me, perhaps to see him, but I received him in the other room. [ Postscript George Sand - Translation ] Good morning, my man. I lie in bed and while the little one writes to you in Tatar, I love you and kiss you. Your wife. \r\n \r\n [1] Petit lait (French) – whey."
My baby. I have received your letter, in which you write to me with details about the transfer. I cannot thank You enough for Your friendly genuine help. I was very interested in the details, but I am angry that you complain and that Jasio spits blood. “I played Nurem's organ yesterday, so I'm feeling better. I also play sometimes, but I can't sing or dance yet. The news about my mother, however pleasant, is enough for it to come from Plat[er] for it to be a lie. The heat here is beginning for good and I will probably leave Marseille in May. But in the south, where I will be staying for some time before I see you. – There will be news about Antek not so soon. Why would he write? I think you have to pay debts, and this is not customary in Poland. Why does Racibors[ki] value you so highly that you don't have Polish customs, Polish, nb. you know that the Polish ones, what you know and I understand. So you live at number 26. Are you well? What floor and how much do you pay? Now, closer to Paris, I am starting to be interested, because I will also have to think about the lodgings, but only after my arrival. Grzy[baby] or healthy? I wrote to him recently. I haven't had any from Pleyel, only one letter, which he wrote through you, a month ago and more. Write under the same name, but Rue et Hôtel Beauveau. Maybe you didn't understand that I was playing Nurem. His body has been brought in, and this body is being sent to Paris. There was a memorial service and the family asked me to play, so I played during the raise. – Did Wieck play my Etude well? How could she choose Etuda instead of something better, the least interesting for those who don't know that it's for black keys! It was better to stay silent. “Anyway, I have nothing to write to you, only that I wish you luck. Hide my manuscript so they don't accidentally go out of print before delivery. If the Preludes are printed, it's Probst's prank. But I shit on all this, and when I come back, we won't be pratsiprazu. Scoundrels, Germans, Jews, scoundrels, gossip, dogcatchers, etc., etc. - in a word, you will finish the litany, because you know them as well as I do. Your Ch. Hug Jasia, Grzymała, if you see.
My darling, we're going to Nohant tomorrow - a bit shabby. – The sea tired us on our way back from Genoa, where we spent a few weeks in peace. – Rest in Marseille is short, but in Nohant it will be longer and we are impatiently waiting for you there – I dream about it – you will come, won't you? Although for 24 hours You must have completely forgotten your illness. - Please, give me the letter to my post office. – Shake hands who deserves it and write us a word to Nohant. your FFC. [ Postscript George Sand - Translation ] \r\n Good morning, dear husband, today we continue over mountains and valleys, but in eight days we will rest from all our journeys. We've just been through a terrible sea storm. The little one showed courage and I think he could ask for an order. You will come to Nohant, won't you, my dear? we count on you! GS
"My baby! how are you? We conclude from your silence for these few days that you have no misfortune and that we will hug you peacefully soon. – Please, send the letter to my people to the post office – I am bothering you with this, because I think that Jasio is already in the country. ""Don't forget what I asked of you, and besides, bring a bundle of silver, which Madame Marliani was to entrust to you or to Aragi."" Do not curse us, because we bless you, and give me a good Polish kiss. your F. Ch. [ Postscript George Sand - Translation ] Good evening, dear friend. We hoped yesterday and today without getting news that the baby is doing better. Maybe tomorrow we'll find out something that will comfort us. We live only [illegible] waiting for Your arrival, wanting to see You and loving You. G. S."
"My baby! Well, here we are after a week's journey. We drove perfectly. beautiful village; nightingales, larks, only you, Bird, are missing. I expect this year will not be like two years ago. Even if only for a few minutes! Choose the moment when everyone will be healthy and will heal for a few days through mercy towards your neighbor. Let us embrace you, and in return I will give you perfect milk, pills. You will have my piano at your disposal. You won't miss anything. Your Fryc. Please, tell me to hand over my letter to the boarding school. Write us a word and send me, if you have, a letter from me, through Jasia. [ Postscript George Sand - Translation ] Dear Husband. I am in deep sadness today. I have heard of the death of my poor friend Gaubert, and I cannot tell you anything cheerful. In my pain I feel more than ever the need to see you and embrace a friend to replace the one I have lost. So you must be loved twice and love twice. It is not true that one stops loving the dead, but one loves them differently. They don't need us anymore. I don't regret them. But we who continue our pilgrimage need each other. Come then, dear friend, we await you with impatience, and we put aside the thought of not seeing you soon. I don't want to say goodbye, but goodbye."
My baby. The end of the month is approaching and so is your arrival. We are happy as children. Don't forget my shoes. Also, tell Fontana to give you Weber's 4-hands notebook from Pi?ces faciles. I'm stretching my ears out for you. Love us, hug (wife's) hands, and a kiss from me. Your Fryc. If Fontana is not among my notes, it will work. [ Postscript George Sand - Translation ] So, my man, for sure, absolutely, no excuse, no delay. You will come, as promised, right after the July holiday. If you do not keep your word, just now, when we are all joyous in hope, we will get sick, the more that we also count on our dear Bignol, and after such a long separation we will rejoice. Devoted GS [Popisek Chopina] Send the letter to the painter at the post office and persuade Arago to come with you.
"My life! Take Malposta as far as Châteauroux: there you will stand at noon next day; thence 2 hours and ? stagecoach which goes to la Châtre; you will get off in front of the garden by which the road goes. You will sit at table after giving us a good hug, etc., etc. I know how difficult it is for you to leave Paris, and for all my desire to see and enjoy you, I dare not insist; but the Lady of the House is already beginning to be sad here, and she is really sorry that You are not to be seen. Promise-good thing, which I'm not surprised at all, but maybe you would do a good deed to visit us. Madame d'Agoult's bed is waiting for you, if it pleases you, perhaps, except for two hearts that look and look like rain kites to you. I am not well, she is weak; maybe you will heal us both with your consciousness. The weather serves. Be honest in the morning, and tomorrow you will see yourself among us. I hug you most sincerely. kiss your hands. your F. Ch. Tell Jasio to give you two or three pairs of my shoes, from those left in the big wardrobe. Thank you very much. [ Postscript George Sand - Translation ] What does this mean! Husband of recklessness, we wait for you in vain! You play with our impatience and try to lull us with deceptive promises. Really, my dear, you need the Lord to come. We must see you. Your little one is still not in the mood. It seems that she needs a less peaceful, less lonely and less regular life than she can have in Nohant. Who knows? Maybe he needs a little escapade to Paris. I am ready to make any sacrifices so as not to watch melancholy consume him. May the Lord come and check his spiritual pulse. Who can grasp the line between physical infirmity and spiritual longing? I will never admit to being bored here. But I think I've figured out what's wrong with him. He is not used to such a serious life, and I am becoming more and more a mother of a family and an educator in an intimidating way. I am forced to do it. Please visit us. Indeed, both father and son need the help of the Holy Spirit to hold on to the heights of the Empire. Yours with all my heart, dear old husband. G. [Chopin's addition] I can't read what she wrote to you. C'est une indignité [1]!!!! [1] C'est une indignité (French) – it is wickedness."
"My baby! Thank you for this letter ? Mr. Chopine. It begins: ""Wind owo pod Węgrowiec"" and ends: ""for you, as a great master of music and composition, Alexander Moszczeński, Brzeski Starost"", in the middle: ""as an amateur of music, already 80 years old, having two hundred-year-old mazurkas, having remembered I am sending you to the madmen about it”. Mazurkas, as you can, dear: ""ram didiridi, ram didiridi, ram didiridi, rally""; in the footnote ""My granddaughter Alaxandrina (as I love you, so Alaxandrina) la ci gift in Gniezno, for the benefic of the emigrants she played to the satisfaction of the audience. Me, my sons, grandchildren, granddaughters, and especially Alaxandryna plays the piano with great speed – Wiatrowo near Węgrowiec”! - Some kind old Polish starost (probably still from those who are ... from the bridge). – The best of the letter is your address on the envelope, which I have already forgotten, and without which I do not know if I would have written back to you so early, and the worst of the letter is Albrecht's death. Want to know when I'll be back? When the bad weather starts, because I need fresh air. Johnny left; I don't know if he didn't ask you to send me a letter from his parents, if by any chance he came to his address during his absence, he would send it to me. Maybe he thought about it, maybe he didn't; however, I would not like the letter to be lost if it comes. Besides, I had a letter from home not long ago, so they won't be writing soon, and maybe in the meantime he, good man, will be back in good health. I'm writing the Sonata Si B Mineur here, in which my march will be, what do you know. There is Allegro, then Scherzo mi b mineur, a march and a short finale, perhaps on the third part of mine; the left hand in unison with the right, they talk after the march. I have a new G major Notturno that will go with G minor, if you remember: [example sheet music] You know I have 4 new Mazurkas: one Palma E minor, 3 local ones, B major, A flat major and C sharp -minor, it seems to me that the youngest children are pretty, as usual, when the parents get older. Without doing anything, I am correcting Bach in the Paris edition not only from graveur errors [1], but also errors accredited [2] by those who supposedly understand Bach (not in pretense that I understand better, but with the conviction that sometimes I will guess). Well, I praised you. Now, if Grzym. arrives (as my grandmother foretold), send me a Weber for 4 hands. If you and not, then my last Ballad in manuscript, because I want to see something. Also your copy of the last Mazurkas (if you have it, because I don't know if my gallantry has come to such an extent as not to forget about it). Also, tell me if you brought a waltz from me to Eichtal (if not, that's okay). – Pleyel wrote to me that you were very obligeant [3], that you corrected the Preludes. You don't know what Wessel gave him for them (write me what he wrote back to you in the past, it's good to know for the future), also whether Probst has left (which he probably does), but when he will come, if you know. My father wrote to me that my old sonata by Haslinger came out and that the Germans praised it. I now have, counting with yours, 6 manuscripts; they will eat the devil if they get it for free. Pleyel did me a great disservice with his offerings, for I am a Schlesing Jew. endangered. But I hope it gets fixed somehow. I love you always. write. Your Fr. By the way, what he wrote to me about Kalkbrenner, I wrote to Pleyel to write to me whether he was paid for the fort of Palma, and not about anything else, as you can judge; I wrote because the French consul in Mallorca, whom I know very well, will be changed, and if they had not paid him, it would have been more difficult for me to negotiate so far. Happily, it was paid well and completely, as he only wrote back to me last week before he left for Belgium. I am not surprised at various fairy tales; you can judge that I knew I was exposing myself to them. After all, even this will pass, and our tongues will rot, and our souls will not be affected. Don't forget my shoes. Send via Grz. with 3 or 4 pairs, although old, it's the most perfect for the countryside in the morning. Write to me as much about yourself as I write to you about myself. Write how do you live? Do you eat at the club? etc. Woyciechowski wrote to me to compose an oratorio. In a letter to my parents, I wrote back why he was setting up a sugar factory and not a Camaldolese or Dominican nunnery. Good-natured Tytus still has Lycean ideas, which does not prevent me from loving him as in high school. He has a son, another . He will be named like me. I feel sorry for him. [1] Graveur (French) – engraver. [2] Accredited - recognized, accepted. [3] Obligeant (French) – polite, obliging."
"My baby. Grzym[ała] will tell you about the apartment. As for the Polonaise, I promise. I hug you. Thank you for your letter and I'll see you soon. Write to me at least about the weather, hug Jasia; probably healthier. Thank you again for the shoes, sheet music, etc., etc."
"My baby! Take a small apartment, and if it's late, take a large one; whatever it be. As for her apartment, she thinks it too expensive, and you won't be persuaded that it's better to add more than to have a lot of tenants in the house. Please don't disobey her orders in any way, put up with Bign so you won't be responsible yourself. I embrace you cordially. Please, love me necessarily. your F. C. Shake hands... [Position George Sand – Translation] Dear Mezu, I like you very much, Vassal, Bearded, old potato boiled without salt, my culpa [1], Stockholm, Califourchon [2]. We cannot wean ourselves from your company and we are eager to be together with you again. This depends on the outcome of your efforts to find us an apartment. I am enclosing a letter to Bign[e]. I write in it to raise, if it cannot be otherwise, but as little as possible - the set price, aj aj aj! It is not necessary that all rooms are large and beautiful. For example, children's rooms can be small, as long as they have fireplaces, and old people's rooms - as long as they are facing south. This is very important both for the little one and because of my rheumatism. Nor do I need a very large or beautiful salon, and I never receive more than twelve people. The main thing is a good layout, you understand, and that everything be clean, fresh, habitable immediately, with no other expenses than furniture. Goodnight Grzym., we love you and you love us. Write to us. Don't listen to what your little one tells you through your nose. His saving on the apartment does not make any sense. It must have room for a servant and must be able to turn around on its own. If you think the apartment is too small, let him talk. He will always have money to pay for his rent. It will cut back a little on drinking, playing cards, women and tobacco. Your wife . [1] Culpa (Latin) - wine. [2] Califourchon – literally: horse."
"My baby. Take the apartment Rue Tronchet 5, just see Grzym., if after my last letter he didn't take one at the Embassy. I like your description very much. If it's not there, give preference to Rue Lafitte, despite the stairs, which don't embarrass me. I wish I had an apartment at the Embassy booked for me and if this Tronchet was vacant; I'd rather lose something than be stuck in a hole all winter with something better to choose from. I even prefer Lafitte. I hug you. Make it good. When I see you, I will hug you for all your good deeds for me. You're honest, and it's even. I love you the old way. Jasia and Grzymała soul. Your C. Hurry up and write, my life."
"My life. Thank you very much for your kind, friendly, not English, but Polish soul. Choose paper, as I used to have tourterelle [1] , only shiny, glossy, for both rooms, and a green, dark, not wide cord for the trail. Something different for the hallway, but decent. However, if there are any more beautiful and fashionable papers that you like and you know that I would like them too, then take them. I prefer smoothly, most modestly and cleanly to ordinary, coarse, episier-like [2] . That's why I like it pearly, because it's neither screaming nor vulgar. Thank you for the room for the servant, because it is very necessary. Now, as far as furniture is concerned, you will do best if you take care of it. I did not dare, as I love you, to trouble you with this trouble, but someday such a good man, collect and arrange them. I will ask Grzem to give money for the transfer; I will write to him myself. As for the bed and the desk, they would have to be cut off by some Ebenist [3]. You would take the papers out of the desk - lock them somewhere else. ""I don't need to tell you how to do it. Rule as you please and as you need. Whatever you do, everything will be fine. You have all my broad confidence. This one. Now the second: You must write to Wessel. (After all, you wrote about the Preludes?...) You must write to him that I have 6 new manuscripts, for which I want him to pay me now 300 francs for each (that's how many pounds?...) - Write and receive an answer . (If you think he won't, write to me first.) - Write to me also, is Probst in Paris? Also sniff out a servant. – If any Pole is honest, decent. – Tell Grzymala about it too. - Let him eat himself, no more than 80. - I'll be in Paris towards the end of the 8th, not soon. “Keep it away. - But - The elastic mattress of my bed would have to be repaired, if cheap - if expensive, then no need. – You order the chairs and shake everything well. ""I don't need to tell you because you know what to do. - Hug Jasia. My life, sometimes my heart is strange - may God give him what he needs. ""But don't let it fool you; though on the other hand... tere bzdere kuku. Well, the greatest truth in the world! and as long as it is as it is, I will always love you as a good man, and Jasia as another. – I hug you both – write, and quickly. Your old man with a longer nose than when Ch. [1] Tourterelle (fr.) – turtle dove; here: turtledove, pearl. [2] Episiersko (fr. l'épicier) – a colonial merchant; trans.: kołtun – here: po kołtuńsku. [3] Ebenista (from French ébéniste) – furniture carpenter."
"My life. \r\n \r\n Weak, lying in bed, stomach sick all night. Today she received the second letter that her drama was accepted. Buloz writes that he expects her around the 15th of October. ""And you don't say anything about an apartment for her!"" She cares and thinks you have so many jobs of your own that you'll forget about her apartment. If Fontan is useful to you for any favour, for running around, or for helping Fontan, use him. He will gladly do anything for me, and a very capable Englishman for business. The good man has already found me a place. He will take care of removing my lumber and I will only ask you to pay the voitura [1] for the transfer. I pity your pocket, but it must be so, if you do not want me to walk on cobblestones in my first days in Paris. She does not write to you: even to Bignas, according to the Rollinat actors, he wrote an urgent letter for her. The cursed tomatoes made her sick. Your protégé was here and for 30,000 furniture insured. For God's sake, and for God's sake, don't curse me for my importunity. You must be half of the village. Shake hands like from a real friendly szpitz. Hug yourself too, hug on all sides. \r\n Yours until death \r\n F. Ch. \r\n [1] Voitura (from French voiture) – a cart; here: furniture truck."
My baby. Thank you for your everything. I'm sure he's done with the intendant. In the hall you order to hang gray curtains, which were in my study with the piano, and also in the bedroom, which were in the bedroom, only underneath the pale muslin of those that were under the gray ones. I would like a cupboard in my bedroom, unless there is no decent place, or the living room is too bare between the windows. If the red sofa, which stood in the dining room, could be made white hussy [1] of the same material as the chairs, it could be placed in the living room. But since that would require an uwrier [2] or an upholsterer to wait for my arrival, it will probably be difficult. You will think and tell me. It is good that Domaradzki is getting married, because I will probably get 80 francs. will give after the wedding. I would also like Czekaj to get married, Nakw[aska] to get married and Antoś to get married. Let it stay between this paper, me and you. Find me a butler - hug Mrs. Leo (probably the first one is more pleasant for you, so I'll release you from the second one if you do the first one). Write me something about Probsta, is there? Don't forget about Wessel. Tell Gutmann that I was pleased that he asked about me. Tell Moscheles, if he is already in Paris, to give an enema from the oratorios of Neukommo, seasoned with Cellini and Doehler's concerto. She'll probably go to the dressing room and make a Valentyna. Thought wild, but you'll admit it's original! For breakfast, give Jasio a guinea pig mustache and parrot kidneys with tomato sauce sprinkled with scrambled eggs of the microscopic world. Bathe yourself in balene infusion [3] to rest all my commissions that I give you, because I know that you will willingly, whatever time allows you, do for me, and what I will gladly do for you when you get married. Which Jasio will probably tell me soon. Not with Ożarowska, because it's my party. P. Platerowa, blow somewhere from me, and P. Paulina, sneeze. Your Ch. See and bear with Grzymała about moving. I wrote to him to ask the good man to pay the transfer voiture. Stick your finger in Osławski and blow the trumpet of young Niemcewicz interspersed with the Horde. Don't tell anyone about it because it's a secret. Write back quickly. [1] Hussy (from French housse) - covers. [2] Uwrierka (from French ouvri?re) – a worker. [3] Balene infusion (from French baleine) – literally: whale decoction.
"My baby. I am sending you 3 letters: the 2nd from Mrs. Marliani, the 3rd from Marliani. The letter to Mr. Saluces is very good. There is a daughter who is advised to profit from you. “I was waiting for Aguade's letter to Mr. Balgueri, but I haven't got it yet. The last gentleman is a great rich man there. As soon as I get it, I'll send it to you. ""May God bless you."" write. Your Ch."
"Dear Chopin. I am sending you two books which Mr. Clericetti gave me for you; accept it graciously, knowing what pleasure you will give this poor man. I don't know if tomorrow we'll have the quartets and quintets you've kindly reserved for me, but I'd be unhappy if I couldn't take advantage of it. I no longer have a fever, but I left the house and felt bad again; now my doctor fears that the slightest cold would bring back the attacks; – if not for this ban, I would come to hug you and ask for news from Nohant. Adieu, my dear, and the power of tenderness. Eug. Delacroix."
"My baby. From your and Grzymała's description, you found me a perfect apartment, we think you have a lucky hand, and that's why a man (this is a great man), because the doorman from Georg's house, who will be looking for a place for her, has an order that, as few If he finds it, he goes to you, and you, by your elegant tact (you see how I flatter you), also look at what he finds and give your opinion. She is particularly concerned that, if possible, it should be separate: a small hotel [1], for example. Either something in the courtyard, a garden somewhere, or if there is no garden, a large courtyard, nb. few tenants, elegant, no higher than the second floor. If a corps de logis [2] is small, or something like the Perthuis, but smaller, or if it's for the street, it should be quiet. In short, something you might think is good for her. If it were close to me, it would be good, but if it is not possible, do not let this consid- eration [3] hold you back. What a small hotel I suppose, in new streets, near Rue Clichy, Blanche or Notre Dame de Lorette, etc., up to Rue des Martyrs. Anyway, I am sending you a list of streets where Mr. Mardelle (porter of the Hotel de Narbonne, Rue de la Harpe No. 89, which belongs to Georg) will look for a lodging. If you could look through something around our quartier [4] during times off from your jobs, it would be very good. Imagine, I don't know from where, but it seems to us that you will find something perfect, although it's late. Its price is 2000 - 2500, even a few hundred francs more could be given if something was perfect. Rom. and Arago promised to employ it, but despite Grzymała's efforts, so far there is nothing decent. I wrote to Grim. and I asked him to use you, my Life, also in this business for me (I say for me, because for me). Today I will write to him again that I also asked you to help me and use your sniffles for me. You need: 3 bedrooms, two of which together, and the third separated, e.g. by a living room; with 3 of them, you would need a bright room to work for her. Those 2 bedrooms may be small, the third one not very big either; besides a living room in relation and a dining room. A fairly large kitchen, 2 rooms for servants and a cellar. Parquet floors, of course, fresh, if possible, needing no repairs. But especially a small hotel is best or in a courtyard as a secluded building, on the garden giving. Let it be calm, quiet, no blacksmiths in the neighborhood, no maid, etc., etc., which you know perfectly well. Decent stairs. Well exposed to the sun, so that au midi (almost necessarily exposé au midi [5]) Again: it is necessary (necessarily) that the 3rd bedroom, next to which the work room will be, is separate from the other 2 bedrooms and if possible, that either the study or the sleeping room should have a separate exit (not necessarily). Let there be no odors. Pretty high. Let there be no smoke, light, as beautiful as possible, that is, an unpolluted view, either a garden or a large courtyard; preferably a garden. On Faub. st. G[ermain] many gardens; also on Faub. st. Honoré. Find by lightning, inspiration something perfect and close to me in these new streets, and as soon as you have what you have, write immediately. Don't be lazy... Or catch Grz., take it necessarily, see, hire et que cela finisse [6] . I'm sending you a list of streets and stupid apartments for example. If you find something and write it, trace the plan; only if there is something convenient, and the time will not be written, you better stop right now, than to release late. I am writing to Grz. about that too. M. Mardelle (a not stupid and decent man, he was not always a porter) has orders to be with you as he finds. You search for your part and let it stay between us. I hug you. Jasia ditto. True gratitude you will have ours as you find. F.Ch. So if you found one and you had to make a contract, if you can't do it for less, don't take it for longer than 3 years. You know that she necessarily thinks that you will find it. [ Attachment: A separate page with the ""stupid, for example, apartment"" mentioned in the letter, on which George Sand marked out with a pencil a number of streets of interest to her. Chopin added: ""Notre Dame de Lorette"", at rue de Clichy he added and underlined ""in the beautiful side""; sideways, having traced a series of streets from the rue Tronchet to the rue St. Florentin, added: ""or on Faub. st. Honoré'. Elsewhere he added: ""Faub. st. Germain."" At the first streets, listed by George Sand, Chopin added: 'In these parts where it is beautiful. You may hear about something similar sometimes. nb. rent from 8-bra, that is immediately. For God's sake, take care of yourself actively, my dear.""] [On the reverse side of this page] all this is small - and if possible a whole hotel: 2 bedrooms - apart from these 2, 1 bedroom and a study - Living room ( small) Salle ? manger Cuisine (quite large) 2 Chambres de domestique Cave and garden p [ ar ] ex [ emple ] street, better garden [Drawing] pas de voisinage – surtout [7] of the blacksmith or any thing that belongs to him. [1] Hotel - here: a villa, a palace. [2] Corps de logis (French) – front of the house; also: standalone building of a larger complex. [3] Consolidation - Respect. [4] Quartier (French) - district. [5] Exposé au midi (French) - facing south. [6] Et que cela finisse (French) – and let it be over. [7] Pas de voisinage - surtout... (French) - without neighborhood - especially."
"My baby. In five, six or seven days I'll be in Paris and I'll find at least paper and bed, if not everything. Have mercy and make it happen. I hasten my arrival, because Jerzy's presence is needed according to his art; just between us. Today we decided our departure the day after tomorrow, so count on a few days for stretching, so today is Thursday, Wednesday or Thursday, we'll see each other. Apart from the various commissions I gave you, and especially in the last letter (the commission of her apartment, which will fall off your shoulders upon our arrival, but until your arrival, be helpful, for God's sake), besides all this, I forgot to ask you to give me a hat at my Dupont's on your street. He has my measure and knows what light weight I need. Let him give him this year's not exaggerated form, because I don't know how you dress now. Besides, go on your way to Dautremont, my tailor on the boulevard, and tell him to make gray breeches for me at once. Choose a dark gray color yourself - winter pants, something decent, with no stripes, smooth and stretchy. You're English, you know what I need. He'll be happy to know I'm coming. Also a black, modest velvet vest, but with a tiny, non-screaming pattern, something very modestly elegant. If there is no decent one, then material [1] black, modestly beautiful . I'm falling on you. Not very open, yes. Servant if possible. – And if you can get it cheaper than 80 francs, because I've gone too far, but if you already have it, it doesn't matter. I prefer 60. My dear darling, forgive me again for bothering you, but I have to. I'll see you in a few days and I'll hug you for all this. Please, for God's sake, don't tell the Polish community that I'm coming so soon, or any Jewish woman (Mrs. Leo), because maybe, being in Paris, for the first few days only for you, Grzym. and Jasia will be. Hug Jasia and Grzym. I will write the last one. I reckon I'll find the apartment. Your Fr. Keep writing to me, 3 times a day, if you like, whether you have something to say or not. I will write to you before I leave. I am waiting for a letter from you. A hat soon, so that it will be in a few days, and order your pants soon, my Julisia [1] Material - here: silk."
"My baby. You are an invaluable creature. This apartment seems to be excellent, but why so cheap? Don't you have some but, very unpleasant? – For God's sake, don't waste time, go to Mr. Mardel, Rue la Harpe No. 89 – but wait a minute – take it with him, see if he hasn't found anything better yet – if not, take him from[e] (he knows about you), go together - take Grzyma too, if you can - and finish. – NB it is necessary that there is no au nord [1] , or at least not quite au nord; – consider les conditions [2] that I gave you in a previous letter – if la majorité [3] is in the apartment, take . Once again - is it neat - does it smell - is it not dirty - are there no neighbors so strong that you can't go for a walk without them? Isn't there a cornet a piston in the house and stuff like that. Write back via the departing courier, although you won't do anything - Trace the apartment - My companion had a good feeling that you'd find it, and he likes what you write - only, for God's sake, or properly - Mind that it's impossible for her. “Weigh it all—and hurry up. – A contract for a year, no, it's a maximum of 3 years – Do and God be with you. Love me and follow your own inspiration - weigh it and let it happen. \r\n Your Ch Is such an apartment like whose for example? Is there no better Mardel? – but his judge[d] don't influence you [ 4] \r\n [1] Au nord (French) - to the north. [2] Les conditions (fr.) - conditions. [3] La majorité (French) - the majority. [4] Does not influence - does not influence."
You are invaluable! Take them Pigal both houses, don't ask. Rush. Bargain what you can if you can (taking both together), if not, then take it for 2500, and don't let it out of your hand, because it seems to us the best, the most perfect. She has you as my most logical, best, and I added: most splendid-English-Polish-sultry beloved friend. Your F.Ch. We're leaving in three days for sure. Grzym, give Jasia a hug.
"My life. The day after tomorrow, Thursday, at We leave at 5 in the morning - and on Friday at 3, 4, and certainly at 5, I'm rue Tronchet N. 5. Please, let people know there. – I wrote to Jasio today to keep that footman for me and to tell him to wait for me on Friday, rue Tronchet, from noon. ""If you'd had time to see me around that time, we'd have embraced first."" you are worthy. Once again, mine and my companion's, accept my most sincere thanks for Pigalle. ""Now, I am asking you, since I don't have pants, that the tailor should order something for me (and a waistcoat, if possible), and prepare it for Friday morning, so that when I arrive, I can change my clothes immediately."" So tell him to take them to Tronchet and give them to Tineau (the butler) who is probably already there. (The valet's name is Tineau!!) - Same with Dupont's hat. – And I will change the second part of the Polonaise for you until I die. You may not like yesterday's version either - although I was brainwashing for like 80 seconds. I have my manuscript in order, well annotated. There are six of them with your polonaises - not counting the 7th Impromptu, which may be bad: I don't know yet, because it's too fresh[!]. But it would be good if it wasn't very Ordovian, or Zimmermanowskie, or Karsko-Końskie, or Sowiński, or swine, or other-animal, because, according to my calculations, at least 800 francs. could bring. ""You'll see that later."" Also, my darling, in a new apartment, order such an able-bodied man that no black thoughts or suffocating coughs come to me - think that I will be good - and wipe away many episodes of the past, if you can. It would also be nice if I could find a few years of great work completed. You will oblige me greatly with this, as well if you rejuvenate yourself or prevent us from being born. Your father ."
My baby! We leave on Thursday morning without delay. Post horses ordered, and on Friday around 5 o'clock in Paris. She will go to the messenger. I wrote to Julian, telling him to wait for me in my flat, good man. Thanks to you a million times for today's letter, which enlightened her and confirmed her choice of apartment in rue Pigal. She will write you a word. I hug you and kiss your hands. Your Ch. [ Postscript George Sand - Translation ] Good morning, you are a beautiful husband, thank you for loving the apartment on rue Pigalle, because I love it in advance. Goodbye Friday.
"Dear Gentlemen. I have always been very pleased with my relations with you so far, and I consider it my duty to send them a direct explanation before we break off relations. Mr. Probst, through whom I have dealt with you, has just informed me that he has written to you regarding my recent manuscripts, and in the absence of a response, feels entitled to reject the price of 500 francs. for each track. This is the price below which I will not deliver anything; I have in my portfolio: Great Sonata, Scherzo, Ballade, two Polonaises, 4 Mazurkas, 2 Nocturnes, Impromptu. Please, gentlemen, will reply to me by return mail, how the case is, so that I can communicate directly with them without any intermediary. Devoted Fr. Chopin."
"You think, I hope, dear Chopinet, that your name caused me a lot of grief yesterday. It's really bad luck, but on the next day off for both of us, I'll ask you to remember the promise that brightens my future in this abyss of cares that here are called pleasures. I hope that you will come into contact with some of my friends, five or six, whose presence will allow you not to regret the good will shown towards me. You see how modest I am becoming; this is partly the Lord's fault. See you soon, I hope, and my friendship remains as it was, in spite of your absences of your own free will and for other reasons. A. de Custine."
"Dear Chopin. Although you are accustomed to my praise being the voice of truth, I cannot get up after a sleepless night without telling you of the intoxicating memory last night left me. I have found the Lord who is whole and even more perfect, greater; time aided by the influence of genius has made you reach your full potential; sublime is this maturity in youth; it is art in all its perfection; perhaps the astonishing impression you made on me is the result of his long absence... I have not forgotten you; however, I found the Lord again with a certain astonishment, which I reproach myself for: so I would be ungrateful in my memories... And yet I thought I had a quality which the Lord especially developed in me: the gratitude that the pleasures of art awaken in me. If once in my life a man of genius gives me the pleasure of a perfect work of any kind, even if he loses an arm afterwards, becomes a stutterer, a fool, I should feel the same pleasure every time I think of him. May the Lord judge by this how grateful I am to the Lord! I have nothing to add to the mystery that I entrust to the Lord: my heart was overflowing, I had to speak, despite the disgust that the Lord aroused in me, at the word, which unfortunately... is my instrument. Have you ever been tempted to break a piano? This is what I feel when the Lord makes me want to cut off my tongue and throw my pen into the fire. Thousand greetings. Until Thursday. A. de Custine."
[...] It would indeed be a pity if the career of an artist with so much hope was ruined at the very beginning [...]
"Dear Chopinet. I'm coming back from the end of the world, and you from even further places, because with the heart and imagination one travels further than by post. In the name of Poland's honor, I hope to find you unchanged. I don't think you can confirm the slanders of those enemies who claim that in this country the absentees are never right. I want to put you to the test by sending you, through Ignacy, a ticket to the Italian Opera; though I am in the country to rest after my wanderings in Siberia, I will come tomorrow to my box, hoping to see the Lord there, and to show him with all the well-known constancy of French feelings. Ignacy will tell you that you must adore me and take care of me; he will tell the Lord why this task rests upon Him. However, I would renounce even what I most desire, which is to please you, if it were a burden for you. Finally, never has a friendship been more faithful and less hopeful than mine. You will save us with your usual talent from all these dissonances, if you will remember me without treating me like a wave of importunities, who undoubtedly bother you, since you have been in Paris for a long time, without having even made inquiries about your closest friends. A. de Custine."
I, the undersigned, certify that I have sold to Mr. Maurycy Schlesinger for his sole property, for all countries, an Etude of my composition, intended for Method of Pianist Methods, pp. Moscheles and Fétis, and that I received from him the sum of two hundred francs. Fryderyk Chopin.
 I received from Mr. Maurycy Schlesinger the sum of five hundred francs for transferring the second Etude for Method of Pianist Methods to the exclusive ownership. Chopin.
"Isn't it true, dear Chopin, that it is a real inkstand and a real pen of a man who does not write? As soon as I saw them, I thought of the Lord. I send them to the Lord with the wishes of a truly friendly heart. I sense the coming age of boredom, so I feel stronger than ever attachment to the old ways, and starting a new year I am getting closer to what I love. I do not wish to add an excuse to the testimony of my affection: I know the shortness of Parisian days, even when they reach into the night, but I also know the shortness of life, and it is hard to know more and more the emptiness and falsity of words every day, knowing where the source of poetry is, means - the truth, telling yourself that it is right next to you, as plentiful as ever, and that you can draw from it! However absorbed by the prevailing feeling, however distracted by the fashionable life of the world, there is always an hour, morning, evening, a moment of inspiration for an old friend, so much less demanding that a little memory is enough to feed his imagination for a year. I entrust these meditations to your heart, if a poet has a heart apart from passionate love and inspiration. I, who sometimes considered myself a bit of a poet, begin to doubt everything from the time I learned the uselessness of disinterested feelings. And here is what I wanted to avoid: reproaches; all because I am insatiable about what pleases me, what touches me, and the Lord condemns me to too strict a diet; when you are what you are, you have a duty to give something of yourself to those who appreciate and understand you. Farewell, evil year 1839! And Pan, fickle sylph, promise me a better one! This is all I wish for myself; as to what I may wish for the Lord, it is not in my power to give it to the Lord, but I must rejoice from the bottom of my heart, thinking that the Lord has found it, and I would rejoice with less sorrow if, for all your happiness, I meant something else for the Lord. Farewell, Polish Playboy! A. de Custine."
"[...] at your place right after 4 o'clock, according to the agreement, and we had to leave with a huge nose, the worse because it was cold - I felt sorry for my companions, and ashamed for you - now maybe you'd like to write to one of them a few words of apology at least - Zaleski's address is 39, rue Grenelle 5 - chez Mr Koźmian, Mickiewicz's address: 1, rue d'Amsterdam; do not write on my hands for free, because I do not want to know you or know you for at least a week and I have to say that Mr. S. Zaleski is still playing for tomorrow and Friday. st. Tue."
"Dear Fryderyk! First of all, my and from everyone you are personally known and dear to, my warmest greetings and well-deserved success as an Artist and a Man in all your intentions and wishes; and now my friendly request. Having left St. Petersburg, the Imperial City of Kings, last year, I was compelled by Wiel. To Karol Soliva, with whom I lived, and I must say, I had all the comforts, I left my manuscript - Oratorio Passio DN. Jesu Christi Seu Triumphus Evangelii - for its complete performance only during this year's great Lent and at the same time I ordered him to announce it, declaring that it would be my wish that this work could be published in Paris by Schlesinger. I don't know if this is Wielm. Soliva has already taken some steps or not yet; but be that as it may, I prefer to inform you and ask you to deign to inform yourself about it and talk to the people of this now so famous house. – You can confidently promise, believe me, dear Fryderyk! that the publisher will make a very profitable business with this work. Not only because of the novelty and value of the music, but also because of the dedications, etc., but because, first of all, the publication of this work reveals a completely new kind of oratorio, in which music as a fine art can most clearly and appropriately celebrate the triumph of its independence (I would like to gave the slightest idea to the composers, artists, experts and amateurs of music in St. Petersburg needed to enforce, I wrote there a plan for a historical oratorio under the title of Peter the Great); oratorio this Ecclesiasticum in four main parts can also be used before or after sermons during Lent, because the abbot Finale et Resurexit and Alleluia consists of just as much used for churches, especially Roman Catholic, smaller branches, etc. One more request: this year only – recently, I even received an expensive souvenir le Second Cantique de X Si?cle etc. through Józef Nowakowski. me by the famous A. Cz. for which I feel greatly obliged to him, what in the meantime you deign to declare to my worthy friend on my behalf and that on a good occasion I will write to him in writing with my eternal gratitude, and you may have different thoughts about music in general and in particular about the oratorio, the opera, etc. I will give. But ... but - in my peaceful Parnassus I will soon place your portrait for the second time, so at my place, or rather next to me, there will be Chopin standing and sitting. There is no such player as we have Field and others. It is a pity that I still do not have portraits (indeed) of your supposed rivals: Thalberg - Henselt - Liszt, as well as your romantic and famous admirer, because I would know how to surround you with them. Love me as I love you, and believe me, that whether you are standing, sitting, or playing at the end, I don't love you less than your... your most sincere, etc. Józef Elsner. \r\n Warsaw, March 24, 1840 An. My regards to Orłowski."
"Tell me, my darling, what do you think best about me? I thought it would be as easy for you to write a few words or a few notes as it is for so many other friends of mine, especially since you are a little younger than some of them, eg Niemcewicz; when you don't want to, you were driving a knot, it will work; why don't you at least give me the album, though I've already sent it several times. This is one interest. The second: Mrs. Mocbourg asks you to set a day and time for a lesson for your old elewka, so that she would come to you with her. They could start only at the beginning of April, because now the mother does not leave the house at all after her illness; daughter was also sick. If you can, then very well; but if you can't by any means, then make sure that you can, and tell me what time you set. I'd have a third business, but I'd better give a room, because, I see, you're quite a rascal and a Parisian, old friends, those who love you and your parents, you care as much as you care about last year's snow. Let it be so when you like it and when you feel comfortable with it. S. Witwicki."
"My darling little and pale! I already warned you about lessons for my neighbor. Mother could not leave for a long time, so they had to wait with the lesson. Now I am asking you for an hour, either on Thursday at 12 o'clock or at 1 o'clock or on Friday at 3 o'clock, because on other days and at other times it would be difficult for them, especially since it is necessary that not only the daughter but also the mother have time for both are to come to you. I am asking you strongly not to refuse this lesson, because I would prefer you to cause me some other unpleasantness, and be so kind as to write me back and tell me whether you choose Thursday or Friday, then next week they would come right away. S. Witwicki. Are my mazurkas and other things already printed? Turkish, to whom you allocated 10 sous for lessons, I began to give these lessons; the poor fellow studies perfectly well, and when the month is over, for those 14 francs of yours, will buy things from Mont Pieté. You see, then, that while you earn 20 francs, I can hardly earn 10 sous."
 am sending you a letter from Wessel, probably for my former interest. Troupenas bought my 7 compositions and will run a straight business with Wessel, so don't worry. What do you do? how you doing? I cough, do nothing. – Liszt has come, he is going to London. Albrechty, Perthuis healthy. “It was celebrated at the club. – Wodziński is always dirty on the body and clean on the soul. I love you, but you know I can't write. Write if you have time. I hope you are well. Your Ch.
 Dear Sir, I would very much like to attend [...] [trans./transl. NIFC]
 Mrs. Sand tells me to send you steel for the first representation of her drama. I'm sorry I'm late. As far as I have seen on the register, your neighbor will be Clot-bey. Fryc-bey.
" send you a promise&nbsp;&ndash;&nbsp;this is the unpublished page of Spiridion. Mr. Rey has taken up your books. You will get Wallenrod later. Stay healthy Ch. May 3! \r\n &nbsp;"
 Dear Gentlemen. Since Mr. Paccini issues on the 30th of this month. one of my Waltzes in his collection One Hundred and One, I feel obliged to send you one copy. I hope that the release will not encounter difficulties - since the price is adapted to our latest systems. I ask you, gentlemen, to accept the expression of my high consideration, Br. Chopin. \r\n
" just saw Vidal; I wanted to talk to the Lord. Severini has been warned to go as soon as possible, you will deal with him. H. Berlioz. [Entry ticket attached] \r\n Sunday, July 26, at half past eleven. Concert Hall, rue Neuve-Vivienne Dress rehearsal of the War Symphony * composed by Mr. H. Berlioz for the memorial service on July 28. H. Berlioz Admission for two, * Funeral March - Farewell Hymn - Apotheosis."
"My dear Chopin. Thank you very much for your kind proposal to publish Oratorio by Mr. Elsner, your master, which is undoubtedly a masterpiece, but you know the French and you know that they do not buy this kind of music. I imported 6 copies of Mendelssohn's Paulus oratorio; rest on my shelves. Please express, therefore, when you write to Mr. Elsner, my best thanks and regret that I could not accept his so gracious offer. Adieu, dear friend, I wish you health and please believe that I am devoted to him Maurycy Schlesinger."
"Dearest Mr. Elsner! I am sending you a few words from Schlesinger. I will not make philosophical remarks on Jewry, but I must defend it a bit, because great works, such as Your Oratorio, cost a lot and are not bought, because apart from the Conservatory, no other etablissement [1] enforces similar things. And the Conservatory lives by old symphonies, which it knows by heart - and happiness for the audience, if occasionally it will hear a fragment of Handel or Bach. It's only the second year for Handel that they start to like it, and these are only quotations, not entire works. And so last winter, the Jude Maccabee choir was performed several times, also the Bach choir, I don't know which one, but when I'm here, apart from Beethoven's Jesus on the Mount of Olives, which I only heard once, nothing much long was given. They try a lot of new things at rehearsals at the Conservatory, but there is a spirit here that, apart from the dead, does not like to execute great works: that is why we will not hear Mendelssohn, nor Schneider, nor Neukomm, nor Mr. then he wouldn't play either. The Conservatory gives a tone of great music, so the publisher can only count on what the Conservatory will bring him. And the Conservatory has its copyists. How I regret not having heard in St. Petersburg this work of yours, which, I am convinced, is superior to anything written of this kind. Undoubtedly, you order it to be printed in Germany, and I am convinced that somewhere else in Cologne, Mainz, Dysseldorf or Leipzig, where every year musical festivals and similar works only give, that somewhere on the Rhine I will soon hear your masterpiece. Also a country where such oratorios often give such works and which is justly respected only for such works, where a thousand singers are easily gathered for this purpose, where Neukomm and Mendelssohn better known as Adam or Halévy - England will surely also take hold of your work and maybe when Birmingham, in that hall purposely built for such things, where a few years ago Neukomm ordered the largest organ to be erected - maybe when we get together again and I will be able to admire you and melt over what lifts me up today at the mere conjecture. I am waiting for a few words from the Lord and I hug Him most cordially, most cordially. Chopin. Mrs. Elsner, my respect [and] P. Nidecka. Orłowski in Rouen, but for him to be here, he would have to add up. How many times have we mentioned you, by the way, precisely the Conservatory. How many times have we wanted to hear through this mass of the most skilful violinists Joseph's Offertory (if I am not mistaken), which the violin still flies over the richest harmony. If you had it printed, please send it to me; I will take them to Habenek and I have no doubt that he will order him to try them, because they are short and avant-garde. Write me a few words, please, please, please. [1] Etablissement – here: institution, establishment."
"Dear child. I arrived at noon very tired; it is forty-five miles here from Paris, not thirty-five miles. We will tell you interesting things about Cambrian citizens. They are beautiful, they are stupid, they are shopkeepers; this is the magnificence of the genre. If the Historical March does not console us, we are ready to die, bored with the attentions they show us. We dwell like princes, but what hosts, what conversations, what dinners! We laugh about it when we're alone; but when facing the enemy, we try to keep a straight face! I don't want you to come anymore, but I want to leave as soon as possible, and I'm beginning to understand why you don't want to give concerts. It is possible that Paulina Viardot will not sing the day after tomorrow due to the lack of a hall. We may return a day earlier. I would like to be far away from Cambreans and Cambrians. Good night, Chip-Chip; good night, Solange, good night, Bouli. I'll go to bed right now; I fall from exhaustion. Love your old lady as she loves you. GS"
"Beloved, dear Chopin. Forgive me you didn't have a hit last night - but my word wasn't kept either; I was so sorry. I thought I would send them to you in Rue Tronchet, but this morning I am sending them to Rue Pigalle. Accept the power of wishes, not like everyone makes, but the wishes of a heart that loves you very, very, very much. I think I'll see you tonight, but right now I'm on the verge of madness. Adieu, Dear Friend. Eug. Delacroix. I am not satisfied with the engravings. They didn't come out pretty, but they'll come in handy. I wish I had time to go shopping. For Mrs. Sand, before I visit her myself, I wish you all the best."
Please, do not refuse me tomorrow, Thursday, dinner with Witwicki and Grzymała. I'll wait for you at 5?. – If you have nothing better to do that evening, then let me introduce you to Mrs. Marliani, where you will see some interesting people. So I'm waiting for you tomorrow. F. Chopin.
 My dear Chopin. Batta is to be at Mr. Zimmermann's tonight. C.V. Alkane.
" Dear friend. I expect you today for lunch at the Café de Foy (opposite Mr. Cap, in my street) at 6 o'clock. Then I'll drive you home to you; you will dress and we will go to Kynarton, who will send for your wife between 6 and 7. All right? Your F.Ch."
 My dear, be kind enough to explain me to Mrs. Gangler - but I've been spitting blood for an hour, and Matuszyński gave me medicine instead of dinner - so I'm going to bed instead of going to listen to her. Your F.Ch. Join me on the way.
Dear Mr Leo. I am spitting blood and my doctor forbids me to speak - Lord forgive me for sending Him my role and please accept my regrets about tomorrow's dinner. Devoted to you, FF Chopin. \r\n
"You have promised me, dear and beloved friend, to meet me some day so that we can talk for a while about the manuscripts you have in your portfolio or that you will write in the future; but as so far I have not received any communication from you on this matter, I am sending these few words to remind you of your promise and to ask you to appoint me a day and time when I can come to you and talk about the above matters. I am convinced that we will be able to communicate very easily on this matter, and I will be happy if, in accordance with the Lord's wishes, I manage to locate as conveniently as possible the youngest children of your imagination, which is as graceful as it is spiritual and original. I eagerly take this opportunity to express once more to you the feelings of esteem and friendship that I always have for you, my dear friend, and I remain always sincerely devoted to you, Sina."
"Dearest Fritz. May the new year be happier than all the years you love, may we all spend it healthily; and in the next, I have a promise, which until now is only an illusion, they could hug you for real. I don't know if Ms. Anato[lowa Nakwaska] is in Paris yet; poor girl, things didn't go as well as she expected. I don't know whether it will satisfy you verbally or in writing about our health, but I think that her arrival will precede this letter; that's why we don't write back to you right after we receive your letter, because you may be a little satisfied by her. She took you there the third, or rather the second drum, the godson, who is the sum of Henry and Ludka, similar to both of them. You would have had Ludka too, but since her swollen nose changed her a lot, parental resentment saved it for later, when everything would return to its limits. The health of all of us is quite good, God willing, throughout the year. The carnival has started, but we still don't know about it. And you, how are you going to spend it this year? Will you rest or will you be more? I couldn't be surprised enough that you thought of staying at home during these Parisian curiosities; I sort of figured out the cause, but still I didn't think you'd stayed home. I was with you all night yesterday. The future Brzowscy and Stronczyński (Bendkowski's daughter) and children decorated the shed because of the Epiphany; after these nativity scenes, again ""Shed"" of a different kind. Little Jadwinia Brzowski played you for us, then he played a little bit, and although he said that only two people play in the world: Chopin (Szopa ? la Dmuszewski) and Liszt, it was nice to listen to this faint shade. I like these people because they value you, and since they can value you, they must have a heart and a soul. He praised me one of your songs, wonderful, wistful, which he liked to listen to; something like this [musical incipit] Could you send it to me sometime? When, if you feel like it, if you think about it. Strange things are happening in the world, which sometimes strip a man of illusion, and I do not want to deprive myself of it, I dare not deprive people of this most pleasant happiness here on earth! I, so sublime, noble, great, pure, created this new, truly educated world in my imagination, that everything that does not correspond to it is painfully irritating, and although many things can be explained, more is an explanation from indulgence than from reality. So Józio marries Marynia, Marynia marries Józio and the wedding is certain in May. Everyone is surprised at this marriage, this choice; what about Anto? Thank him very much for the note and Meru; kindly, greet them cordially. Count Jozio, with whom everyone is happy, has up to 400,000 and estates in the neighborhood of a maid who is only a few years younger than him, because he always wanted a wife who would guide him, not him. Generally, if he gains from his unexpected choice, the other party loses; at least that is the opinion of everyone who hears about it and knows it either personally or from the opinion of a person. May God bless them and remember! And Jagusia Brocka is getting married already; it's good that grandma isn't watching all that's going on. Do you remember Polcio Krzysztofowicz, your husband's cousin; In 1920 he married Jerzmanowska Kasia, niece of Ostrowski, a counselor from the Treasury Commission. Her uncle, Paweł Jerzmanowski, who was with Napoleon on Elba, a colonel or a general, married to one of Józefina's former ladies, is said to live in rue Lafitte No 21 in Paris. He once loved his niece very much, he even wanted to have her with him, but his parents wouldn't let him; now married, she wrote to him, addressed as above and the letter came retro, refusé [1] was written. My dear, be so kind as to tell me if he still lives at this number in this street or elsewhere, if he still lives, and tell me. Just don't forget, my love; he had lived there for centuries. Grandma calls out: finish, because at this moment she came here and bears your namesake, and she is in a hurry to go home. So I hug you from my soul together with my husband and I kiss each finger. Say hello to everyone and Nak[waska] when you see her. Uncle's kids kiss hands. [1] Retro, refusé - back, not accepted. \r\n"
"My dear Frederick. Your last letter came to us on Christmas Eve; on that day the whole family was gathered for supper, as tradition dictates, if you remember, and also to have a Christmas for your sister's children. How happy these adorable creatures are when they see these little things appropriate for their age. You'd have a lot of fun seeing them run from one thing to another, jumping up and down. But enough about that, I'll just tell you that I was uneasy, because I couldn't believe you had forgotten December 6, and I was afraid that your health might prevent you from taking your pen in your hand. Your letter brought me a pleasant reassurance, and I thank You for this letter. My dear child, I applaud the young man's flattering opinion - you know whom I mean - about the two people I told you about; time will tell him whether I was right or not. But in the end, as Doctor Panglos says in Candide, everything in the world is for the best; with such a light character, I think that this young man could have great anguish... The sisters will write you more about it, and Mrs. Anat[olowa Nakwaska] will provide details. We are very happy that - as you tell us - you have such care, but we were also curious to know a little about this intimacy. I received the glasses and glasses you sent me yesterday by post from St. Petersburg; I use them to write to you to thank you for the favor you have done me. I read with pleasure the wishes of the good Antoś, as well as of the venerable W[odziński]; want to thank them for them from me. Your friend Titus was here, he's a little unwell and he's going to go to Greifenberg because he's in pain because of a tumor that's growing slowly on his chest, between the skin and bones. As for us, we feel fine, in three months I have only gone out three or four times; fortunately, I have no business which would force me to leave my room, and your mother, despite the weaknesses that beset her from time to time, is still doing well. To be honest - only our hearts are always the same, they retain all the strength of attachment to children, among whom you are not forgotten. So we hug you very warmly. Ch. Żywyn greets you, Skar[bek] is happy, Elsner is doing well; I was told that he constantly composes things of an ecclesiastical character."
Dear friend. You must see Mrs. Bouctot from Rouen, who lives at the Hotel des Empereurs at ul. de Grenelle St. Honoré No. 22. It's about lessons for her daughter. He'll be here tomorrow at 9am. If you have time, come to me. She needs to play, she won't be in Paris for long. Your Ch.
 My dear Chop! I ask the Lord to give my maid the tickets, but instead of two I ask you to give me three. I will explain this request later. I hope you are feeling well today. Dedicated Henry Heine.
 Please send this letter to your mother. I kiss you SW
Dear Gentlemen. A few months ago I received a letter from you gentlemen in which you were kind enough to offer yourselves to me as publishers, but there is no mention of the Waltz (published in Paris by Paccini) which I thought fit to send to you at one time. Since I currently have several works to be published (including Allegro de concert, Fantasy, etc.), I would like you, before proceeding with the contracts for these new works, to be so kind as to answer me in two words regarding this Waltz and send me the payment according to prices of my recent compositions. I await your prompt reply. Devoted Chopin.
 Dear Master. I take the liberty of recommending to you a young composer whose name is certainly familiar to you. Mr. Alary is to spend a few days in your city and would very much like to make such an interesting acquaintance with the Lord. Devoted Chopin.
"My darling, I am sending you one hundred francs for various expenses, from which you will first collect for Sharivari, pay for the rent (that light), pay the porter's letters at home, and the bouquet-seller, who demands six. You can buy me from Houbigant Chardin on Faub. st. Honoré benjoin soap, 2 pairs of Swedish gloves (you can find an old one somewhere in the wardrobe), a bottle of patchouli, a bottle of bouquet de Chantilly. In the Palais Royal, in the gallery on the side of the theaters, almost in the middle, there is a large haberdashery shop (as they say in our country); it has two windows with displays of various caskets, pranks and nothingness, shining, elegant and expensive. There you'll ask if they don't have ivory hands to scratch their heads with. You must have seen a similar prank more than once: a small hand, usually curved, white, mounted on a black stick. I think I saw one there; ask and they will tell you. Well, find this prank and send it, if nb. not more expensive than 10, 15, 20 or 30. Let Pleyel give you a copy. my Preludes, and from Schl[esinger] take all my Etudes. If my Dantan's bosom is with Suss, buy 2 and have it well packed for the road; if not, please go to Dantan, who lives in St. Lazare, where Alkan is (whom you'll hug when you see), and ask if you can have them and where he'll get them (in one way, remind him my brown one, what he was supposed to put down). In the cabinet above you will find a flat tin bottle, trimmed with flannel, which is applied to the belly with warm water, and a new inflatable pillow, which I bought for the road. Add Kastner to this and send it packed (or rather, you have an emballeur [1] in front of you): have it packed in a suitably sized parcel, well wrapped, and send Lafitte et Cayard, addressed to me as letters. Get away, I beg of you. Save the rest of the money for other shipments. Don't pay Schlesinger and don't delay for him if he doesn't have Kastner, but please send me Cherubini traité du contre point [2] (I don't know the title well). If he doesn't want to give you Cherubini without money, pay, because Cherubini may have given it to you, and he was just a commissioner. I will write to Troupenas in a few days through you. I hug you because the mail is leaving. Forgive me, my old man, but you will receive the letter on Sunday. Send on Monday. Ch. [1] Emballeur – packager, forwarder. [2] Traité… du contre point – a dissertation on counterpoint."
"I'm sending you Tarantella. Be kind, rewrite it, but first go to Schlesinger or Troupenas and see the Recueil [1] of Rosini's songs better edited by him, where is the Tarantella (en la), I don't know if it's written in 6/8 or 12/8. They write anyway, but I would prefer it to be like Rossini's. So if on 12/8 or, what may be, on [marked alla breve] with threes, when transcribing make one measure out of two. You understand, honey. So it will be: [example of music] Also, please, instead of repeating signs, write everything. Hurry up and give Leon with my letter to Schubert. You know that before 8 o'clock next he leaves Hamburg, and 500 fr. I wouldn't want to lose. As for Troupenas, you have time. And if the tact of my manuscript is wrong, don't give it to me, just rewrite it, and also rewrite it for Wessel a third time. You will get bored with this nasty [!] rewriting, but I hope I won't write anything worse so soon. Also, please, see the number of the last work, that is the number of the last Mazurkas, that is also the Waltz, which came out at Paccini's, and give the next number to Tarantella. I am calm because I know that you are willing and efficient for me. I don't think you will receive any similarly charged letter from me. Were it not for the fact that I could only be at home with one foot before leaving, you would not have this unpleasantness. It's not over yet. Charles had forgotten the tin flannel-trimmed belly hot water bottle. It looks like this: [Drawing] If you find it in the wardrobe, please send it. Also buy me a Witwicki, because I don't have it. Also go to the Palais Royal, buy me at number 37 (I believe) in the gallery on the side of the theater a blouse en toile crue [2] for 14 francs, a blouse de chasse fermé par devant, forme de chemise [3]. If not 37, then 47 or 27, such a dozen tailor. The form of the shop is as follows: [Plan with explanations: gallery, entrance, corridor, etc.] There is only one who has such blouses. I bought from him a week ago: mother-of-pearl buttons, well sewn, two breast pockets, etc. [The passage from the words: ""It's not over yet"" to ""on the breast, etc."", in the original crossed out by Chopin]. No need, honey. I reflected. If I need it, I will write to you. So hire Tarantella, give it to Leon. Tell Leon to keep the money he picks up until my arrival. Again, I apologize for my intrusion. I received one letter from mine today that you sent me. Tell the porter to give you all my letters. Do not forget about me. Your Ch. [1] Recueil - collection. [2] En toile crue - made of gray linen. [3] Blouse... de chemise – a hunting blouse fastened at the front, similar to a shirt."
"My baby. I am sending you a letter to Pleyel for Buchholtz, about whom my father actually wrote to me in his letter. I am also writing to Pleyel that I asked you to be with him for a loyer [1] . If you have December, here it is not more beautiful; tonight the wind uprooted huge trees, but the Holy Medar[d], that is, those 40 days will end tomorrow, so hope for good weather. We are talking about time!!! - My Darling, old Brother, I will play for you sometime perhaps in the dark for apology, if you are still able to listen to my similar justification. I embrace you most cordially, my good Julian. write. Jasio, let me, good man, write a word. Ch. [1] Loyer - rent, payment for the rented item; here we are talking about renting a piano for a while."
My baby! Please be with Pleyel with this letter, speak to him himself. I am writing to him about a better piano, because mine is not good. Read his letter and seal it. You will learn from it that I am asking you for an answer. Write to me as soon as he can have it ready for dispatch, so that I can arrange things with the messenger from Châteauroux. I doubt he would refuse me or put it off until later. But if that be the case, don't give him a kulak, just write to me. Once again, I'm sorry for the commission, but it's not the last one, don't be afraid. Your Ch. write.
"My baby. Thank you for the letter from home and please give this letter to the boarding school (only by yourself, please). ""Rewrite the Tarantella for Wessel and give my manuscript to Troupenas (that's Mr Masset). Read the letter I write to him, seal it, and tell him the day Tarantella comes out in Hamburg, if you know, that is, if Schubert wrote back to me. (Which means that if a letter comes to me from Hamburg, unseal it, look at it and tell Troupenas right away; then also send a Tarantella by post to Wessel and write the day of publication.) Thank you very much for Jasiah's letter, dear - I already wrote I'll text him back. ""As for you, take Troupenas's money to Albrecht for the account or against the account of the last culprit, rue Pigal[le]. Let him give you the bill so I know how much he's owed. Hug him warmly and wish them luck. ""They're both worth it."" Leona, when you see, bow very politely. Love me the old way, don't frown for a commission - imagine that we're on Mackartny's lesson - imagine that my nose is getting longer and my mind is getting shorter - that 30 more years, and I don't hear or see. – Take comfort [!] that you do not have romanticism or guty [1] – or that you do not resemble old Wołoski, or that some similar misfortune has not befallen you. - Take comfort in this - it is also my only consolation, although I am closer to Wołoski than you. Your sincere and constant F. [1] Guta (French goutte) - gout."
"My baby. Once so good, be until the end. Go to Rulaż [1] which is Mrs Hamberg et Levistal, successeurs de Mr Corret fils ainé et C-no: Rue de Marais St. Martin No. 51 ? Paris, and tell them to send for the piano at once to Pleyel, so that he can set out the next day. Tell the roulette to go par envoyé accéléré et non ordinaire [2] . It costs more, but it goes much faster. It will probably cost 5 francs. from centner. I will pay here, and you only have to give yourself a receipt, or recipisse, on which they will write you how much it weighs, and when it will go, and when it is binding that it will come to Châteauroux. It is a rullage that goes straight to Toulouse and only assembles things on the way, so the address for Pleyel's piano must not be ? la Chatre, but Mme Dudevant ? Châteauroux (as I wrote above). The post office at Châteauroux knows about it and will send it to me immediately. These recipisse is only because I want to oblige more; they do not need to send me, because it is only in the case of any complaints that could occur, what would we need. Here in Châteauroux the correspondent says that the par accéléré will come from Paris in four days, so let them promise you four or five days at the most to get to Châteauroux. Then have the address ? Châteauroux put down (tell Pleyel that I will write to him thanking him these days). Take the accéléré slip from Mr. Hamberg et Levistal. Hurry up and write me a kind word. Now to our business. If Pleyel doesn't please you, and you think Erard will be better off, change it, but don't take it lightly: see if Erard will actually be obliging. I don't know why you should stick to Pleyel, if the more obedient one, even selon toutes les prohabilités [3], should be polite to you there. As for Tarantella, seal and send this letter to Hamburg. Fearing not to delay this letter, I will write to you tomorrow about other things, according to Troupenas, etc., and now I hug you Ch. Thank you for your good intentions. But I won't burden him with any commissions. Wish him a good journey. Hug Jasia and tell him to write. Tell Pleyel I'll write to thank him. \r\n \r\n [1] Rulaż (from French roulage) - a transport company. [2] Par envoyé... ordinaire – by expedited, not ordinary mail. [3] Selon toutes les probabilités - in all likelihood."
Sir. By sending you the Tarantella, I asked you to kindly inform me of the date when you intend to publish it. Having received no answer to this question, I repeat it, expecting a return message, in order to be able to answer the inquiries of the publishers in Paris and London. Please accept my kind regards. Fr. Chopin. – see reverse – at the end, it is where semper animato et crescendo was written in the 8th measure, it should be in the bass (*) fa-bemol (fes) instead of la-bemol (as), as the copyist did [follows a copy bars 39–36, counting from the end of the Tarantella] – the same 8 bars later [a copy of bar 28 from the end of the Tarantella follows] (*) (fa-flat) fes instead of A.
" thousand thanks, my dearest Lord, for the kind words that Miss Fryderyka Müller gave me from you. Every word from the hand of the Lord is worth as much as a whole page, and a hundred sentences would not tell me more than what I find and read in these few words of friendship written by my dear and beloved Fryderyk, because they express feelings as simply as they are touching and the tender memory that the Lord has for me. I read it all in them; I feel honored and happy, and to repay the great pleasure that your writing has given me, I am sending you, through our dear friend Dessauer, a small pouch that I started making for his birthday! It is quite similar to the one I made for my dear foster son, your brother by choice. Please, kindly accept this little souvenir, bearing the colors of your homeland, and so many cordial wishes of happiness that, if not for your friend Dessauer, who expresses them to you in his own way, you could almost believe them. May Heaven bless the Lord and shower Him with all the pleasures and allurements of life that the Lord desires. I was crazy about Chopin from the moment when your charming pupil - who spoke only about you, touching us to the depths of her heart - delivered to me proofs of your always the same friendship. How much that says! A letter from our beloved Chopetz [!], as good as it is short; never mind! I know how much this sacrifice of the Lord costs: therefore, I thank you for the proof that the heart of the Lord speaks to me quite sincerely, and for the fact that I can give myself without remorse to the happiness that the memory of the Lord has given me. Adieu, my dearest son! Always love me a little and think of your old mother often and much. And when the Lord will be very well disposed and willing to give me pleasure, then (forgive my boldness) send me your portrait as a pendant to the portrait of Dessauer dem lieben Schmerzensohn [1], who with this gift gave me crazy joy, immense and incomparable. I found our Dessauer: always the same, but I could not enjoy much the charm of his pleasant company, because the poor fellow felt very bad here with us. For this reason, we deny ourselves the pleasure of keeping it longer. ""Then may the Lord take him, but please guard and care for him tenderly, my dear and good Lord!"" Ah, if I could! if i was free! I wouldn't let him go alone. I would go with him to protect him from any danger. And to see him again with my beloved Fryderyk. Adieu - please think of me. Katarzyna Mateczka. [1] Dem lieben Schmerzensohn (German) - beloved child of sorrow."
My baby. My minion completely dismissed today. He is leaving and will probably be at home, that is, with you, along with this letter. If he has things at home, give them to him, that is, let him take them. Fully paid, no complaints. Please, I just don't want him to live in the house by chance. He's good with the porter, so maybe he'd let him. Please, I don't have anything with him anymore. You do not take it for any money, because it will pay you more, as it is worth. Yesterday I wrote one at night, today I am writing you a second letter that I have completely and completely dismissed it. So you don't keep him at home by accident. Your Ch.
"My baby. Thank you for your kind letter. Unseal all you think you need. Don't give Troupenas the manuscript until Schubert writes the day it goes out of print. Probably soon the answer will be through Leon. It's a pity that this Tarantella went to Berlin, because as you saw from Schubert's letter, Liszt is mixed up in these monetary matters and I can have trouble, because he is a touchy Hungarian, ready to think that because I didn't order the manuscript to be returned, only for money, he is ready to think I don't believe him or something. I don't know what, but I have a feeling there's going to be pate. Don't say anything about it to the weak Leo, be with him, if it behooves you, and bow down from me; say thank you (although you're welcome) and apologize for the embarrassment, because it's always his courtesy to take on the shipment. Also bow down to Pleyel, whom you will see, since Portales will send you a residential ticket (as you and Pleyel know). Tell him to forgive me for not writing to him (don't tell him he sent me a very bad piano). Your milkmaid is épicier [1] on rue Castellane opposite du marché [2]. He has the composition of milk every morning. A letter to your parents, please, alone, but only alone, put in the dormitory before 4 o'clock. Forgive me for keeping you busy, but you know how much I care about my letters. Probably you Escudiers will send you this famous album. If you like, you can tell Troupenas to tell Escudier for me to send you one copy for me; but if you don't want it, then give it a rest. One more boredom: slowly rewrite that unhappy Tarantella that will be sent to Wessel as soon as the day is known. If I bore you so much with this Tarantella, be sure that it will be the last time. Therefore, I will certainly not send you any manuscript. If there is no news from Schubert in a week's time, please write to me, but don't bother Leon about me. Then you would give the manuscript to Troupenas. But I will write to him about it. In the meantime, I hug you warmly. Your Ch. Write whenever you have a moment. [1] Épicier - a colonial merchant. [2] Du marché – bazaar, market."
"My baby. So I am sending you a letter to Bonnot: read it, seal it and give it back, and if you find something convenient for me when you walk through the streets where (you know long ago) I can live, please write to me. Now the condition of the stairs does not exist. I am sending you a letter to Dessauer, which Mrs. Diller from Austria came to me here in a letter. Did you send it to me? but I did not recognize your hand. today he came. Never mind. Dessauer must be back in Paris by now. Ask Schl[esmger], he probably knows that. Charles must have returned by now. Give Dessauer few details about me; don't even tell that you're looking for an apartment (not even to Antoś, because he's for Miss de Rozi?res, and she's making gossip and jackets [1] out of nothing, which reach me here in a strange way ... You know what sometimes grows out of nothing, how it will pass through the mouth, what it will smear and what else it will do... There is much to say, but from the most innocent things that I wrote to you, de retro to me oxen came this way). I don't write to Jaś, but tell him that I will. What you write to me about Poland seems funny to me; God, I don't think so. ""As for the unhappy Tarantella, you must have given it to Troupenas (that is, Masset), and if you think so, send it to Wessel by post."" Tell him to text you right away that he picked up (and if Schubert hasn't texted back, text him so he'll let you know right away, and let Wessel know). I write you a lot of letters, but maybe you enjoy it? It's been a nice time here for a few days, but what about my music, it's ugly. Mrs. Viardot spent 15 days here; we made less music than we did anything else. Write to me, please, what you want, but write. May Jason be well. But but! Don't forget on exp. Troupenas to write: Hamburg chez Schubert, Londres Wessel, and also to Wessel. In a few days I will send you a letter to Mechetta in Vienna, to whom I promised something. If you see Dessauer or Schlesinger, ask if letters to Vienna must be franked. I hug you. Keep well. Ch. [1] Kakety (French caquets) - gossip."
Dear Mr Mechetti. I have the manuscript at your disposal at present. It is a kind of fantasy in the form of a polonaise, and I will call it a Polonaise. If you are satisfied with the price of 25 louis for Germany, please be so kind as to write me a word specifying how you would like to make the reciprocal transfer and the time of delivery. Otherwise, please write back to me, so that I may dispose of my manuscript differently. I am reminded of your friendly memory, devoted Chopin. Thousands of greetings and respects to Mr. Malfati and his family.
"My baby. I received your letter today in which you inform me about Troupenas. Thank you, 300 was due. Also thank you for Albrecht. You must have already received my letter to Bonnot. You must have already found out whether letters to Vienna are franked? Or if Dessauer has arrived, advise me on how to post my letter to Mechetta. It's a money business, so I don't want the letter to get lost anywhere in Austria; because you know how I like to write. I offer him a new manuscript (a kind of polonaise, but more fantasy). this once. Now the second. Be at Roth's with the letter, read it and seal it. He lives on Rue Neuve de Mathurins (next to you) in one of the new houses on Rue Montblanc. You know, going to the left of you, that house, which is a suta gate, into which you enter obliquely, number 6 or 10. Well, the first hall after the gate, in the mezzanine, Dr. Roth lives. If he tells you that Tokaya can do it for me, ask why and write to me right away. I will send you money with instructions to send this Tokay to Marseilles. You are fit and honest; That's why I'm giving you commissions. You've done everything so well for me. Today I read only one thing in your letter, which was frankly unpleasant to me (but you couldn't have guessed it!!), and that is that you gave Antek my breast. Not because he has it; not because I need it or because I'm standing for it (you don't even need to ask Dantan for another one), but because if Antoś took him to Poznań, there will be new bags there, and I already have too many of them. If I did not burden Antosia with any commissions, it was not for anything else; because what better opportunity could there be? But you see, Antoś did not understand!!! And if they still tell their Maiden! Maybe you understand! And it will seem strange to the Parents that they are not the first to have this cover. They won't believe I didn't give it to him. I am in Antek's house, registered differently as a piano player. It will be different for some people. You don't know them! Here everything will come retro in a different color. These are very delicate things that do not need to be touched. Has become. Please, darling, don't tell anyone what I wrote; let it stay between us. If I have not erased it, it is because you will understand me. Don't make any reproaches. Love me and write. If Antek has not gone yet, please leave things as they are, because it will get worse: he will tell Miss de Rozi?res all this, because he, good-natured but weak! and she, indiscreet and willingly showing her intimité [1] with him and willingly supporting others' interests, will smear and make an ox out of nothing, as it is not the first time. He is (between us) an insufferable pig who has dug himself into my yard in a strange way and is sniffing and looking for truffles among the roses. He is a person who cannot be moved, because whatever he touches, such indiscretion is unheard of. In a word, an old maid, We old bachelors, far better. Ask the good Charl when he has joined me, and I will gladly give him a certificate. Give him a good word. I will write to Jasio. Hug him. Love me. Your Ch. [1] Intimité – intimacy."
My baby. Thank you for shopping with Roth, 200 bottles too much for me. “I apologize for your course,” and send the certificate to Charl, whose name is Louis. “You probably already have an answer from Hamburg. If you send Wessi, write to him in one way, whether he wants a new Polonaise, the one I will send to Vienna. Write me a word - also what Jasio does. - I'll write to him. Let him write to me. Hug the Albrechts, Leon if you see Alkan too. Your Ch.
"My baby. I have received all your letters and Dessauer's package. Hasslinger, a dick, wants to print - or rather, he printed, and wants to publish today the things that I gave him for free in Vienna 12 years ago. How do you like it? ""I won't write him back, or a salted letter that if I send him I won't seal it for you to read."" As for Dessauer's illusions about Mechetti, the second Viennese editor, I had a letter from Miss Müller, who writes to me that he did not want to give Mendelson anything for the item for the same album to which I proposed him the Polonaise. – Liszt's article with the concert for Cologne Cathedral amused me a lot: and 15,000 people counted, and the president, and the vice-president, and the secretary of the phil[harmonic] society, and that Kalesza [1] (you know what fiacres there), and that port, and that ship! - He will be a deputy someday - perhaps even a king in Abyssinia or in the Congo - but as for the motifs of his compositions, they will lie in the journals together with those two volumes of German poetry. ""Schlesinger's medal with the Queen's portrait on it, I swear it's a guinea."" - As for Antek - I am convinced that his disease is exagerated. But he wrote something to me, it was too late, because his hen immediately here, a tender, desperate letter with entrustments to the lady of the house wrote - that she was going to him - that she applauded conventions, those strict conventions! – that his family are wicked, savage, barbarians! that only Nak[waska] takes out a friend in whom she found a friend and who gives her the passport of her governess to hurry to save him - that she writes so briefly (3 quarters stamped) because she does not know if she is alive - that she expected it after terrible goodbyes and the nights he spent in tears, etc., etc. With a stick! with a stick! old boat! [!] And what angers me the most is that you know how much I love Antek, and not only that I can't help him, but I have a face to shake hands with him. I realized late - and not knowing what was going on, and not knowing their inhabitants, I presented this bunch to P. Sand as a piano mistress for my daughter, whose collar she had sewn into, and a victim [2] of her love, pretending to be aware of my past through the Polish community abroad she saw herself in various positions, she violently sticks to intimité PS (and you won't believe how neatly, how slyly perfect - and how much she was able to take advantage of my relations with Antos). – And you can judge how pleasant it is for me, especially since (as you might have thought) Antek does not love her otherwise than as someone who sticks with him and costs him nothing. Antoś is apathetic with all his kindness and will let himself be saddled, especially by such a shapely schemer who has an appetite for him. She blows him everywhere, and par ricochet [3] me (what's less), and what's worse, Mrs. Sand. She thinks that since Antek and I have been together since childhood, so... [series of crossed out words and dots]. Enough already, isn't it?! Now to the tastier stuff. I lost a Strasbourg pate on a bet... I send you 50 francs. Please go to Chevet at the Palais Royal and buy one for 30 fr. It should be big. They come to him in round wooden boxes from Strasbourg. Address it to me and send it by stagecoach as soon as possible. If he is small for 30, give 35 or 40. But let him be rich. I get angry that so much money is needed for pâté, especially when it is needed for something else. – Give my letter to the editor of the German. Hug Jasia. Describe the apartment on the first floor with the number and details: what kind of stairs? do you have to go past the stables? do you have to get tired going in? or lieu [4] on the road? or high? does it smoke? is it dark? etc. I would like somewhere in Montblanc, or on Mathurins, or on the boulevard near Chaussée d'Antin. Of these 50 francs save for the extension of the Szarivary subscription, which I believe is ending these days. Write to me soon. Are we still coming back to the country!! Have they gone completely mad?! I'm not afraid of Mic[kiewicz] or Sob[ański], they're big heads and can survive a few more emigrations, without losing their minds or energy. May God repay you for your good friendship. Write and love the old man as he loves you, old Englishman. Ch. Let me write something. I am not sending you a letter to Leipzig today. [1] Kalesza (French caleche) - kolasa. [2] Wiktima (from French victime) – a victim. [3] Par ricochet – here: indirectly. [4] Lieu (properly lieux d'aisances) – toilet, paragraph."
My baby. Send this letter to Germany. Throw it straight into the bursa. I received your letter and Miss Müller this morning. He writes me about the manuscripts for Mechetta. – Please also describe to me the Place Vendôme apartment. Stairs? or mansard? draw. Hug Albrecht, I feel sorry for him, good man. Also tell me who the house next door belongs to? or not to Tamburini? Pate come large. At the end of this month I will bring you my pies from my smoky kitchen. The kitchen would have to be whitewashed, but the lime in the area was dead. For another chef, a white kitchen, for me, a smoky one. Love me if it doesn't make you submissive. I hug you, my old man. Ch. Tell Jasio a lot from me. I think like you about the apartment, that I will take the one next to me. Write even if you are not sure.
Please, read it and send this fool a letter immediately. Don't send me any pâté when there are no Strasbourg pates. And what about the apartment? Because on Mathurins completely au Nord, I am undecided and I want a description of this first floor on Tronchet. You don't tell me which Tronchet number? Write to me and prepare to rewrite this Polonaise for Mechetta. Scoundrel Wessel, I will never send him, this Agréments au Salon, anything. Maybe you don't know that he called my second Impromptu or some Waltz that way. Hug Jasia. I will write to you in detail tonight. Don't waste your time with Wessel. Address and write on top that in the case of Mr. Wessel of non-attendance, that Mr. Stapelton or Stapleton should open if you think it is necessary. I hug you and you. I see I'm not made for money. Ch. Mick[iewicz] will end badly if he doesn't mock you.
"Here I am on rue Tronchet; I made the journey without getting tired. It's eleven o'clock in the morning. I'm going to Via Pigalle. I'll write tomorrow, please don't forget me. I kiss the children. Ch."
"My baby. Yesterday, Thursday, I stood here. I made a Prelude in C sharp minor for Schlesinger, short as he wanted. Since it is due out for the new year, just like Mechetta Beethoven, so do not give my Polonaise to Leon just yet (although you have already copied it), because tomorrow I will send you a letter to Mechetta, in which I will explain to him that if he wants anything short, so instead of that Mazurka he demanded (which is already old), I will give him today's Prelude for this Album, which, well modulated, I can confidently send... Let him give me 300 for it (isn't he?) and let him par dessus le marché [1] take the Mazurka, but do not print it in the Album. Troupenas, that is Masset, if he causes you any difficulties, don't spare a penny and tell him that he may not want to print everything (what he doesn't want, I'd sell to someone else at a higher price). Tell him it's 600 with London, and that a far more important manuscript like those past ones. This applies to me. Now. In the desk drawer to the right of the bottom [Drawing of a desk with drawers, one of them says: ""in this""] a package addressed to Mme Sand, sealed (in the place where the cash register is usually). Wrap this package in oilcloth, seal it and come by stagecoach to Mme George Sand. Hem the address with twine, because that's how it detaches from the oilcloth. Mrs. Sand asks me so. I know you'll do great. The key, the second one I believe, is in the mirrored cabinet on the shelf above, next to the shaving brush. If not, have a locksmith open it. I love you the old way. Hug Jasia. Ch. write the word. I am opening the letter to write to you, so that this package, i.e. the wallets, should be wrapped in slats or in a box or whatever you think, as long as it does not get wet, torn and lost. [1] Par dessus le marché - in addition."
Dear friend. P. Fontana has a Prelude for you. I give you the title to England (of course, if you wish) for a hundred francs - because I want no more dealings with Wessel. As for the property for France, I give it to you in exchange for the deletion of my account with you to this day, and for a beautiful copy of the Album worthy of being sent to Princess Chernyshev, to whom I dedicate my Prelude. “A word from the Lord on this matter will please me. Dedicated to Mr. Ch.
"Baby. Thank you for sending the poulares. I am sending you the Prelude with a larger character [!] for Schl[esinger], and a smaller one for Mechette. You will similarly cut off the manuscript of my writing of the Polonaise, fold (after numbering the pages) similarly to that Prelude, attach my letter to Mechetti, seal it in the envelope I am sending you, and hand it over to Leon with a request that he send it by post, because Mechetti is waiting for it. Send Hasslinger's letter to the post office yourself, and if you don't find Schlesinger, leave him the letter, but not the manuscript, only after he tells you that he accepts the Prelud to nullify the bill. If he does not want the propriété [1] of London by any means, tell him to write to me. And you write. Tell him that I have these 100 fr. I'm not asking for it right now. Also, don't forget to add the opus on the Polonaise and the next number on the Prelude, which you send to Vienna. I don't know how Chernishev is spelled, maybe in a vase of furniture or somewhere on a small table around this brown prank you will find some note from her, or from the governess, or from her daughter. If not, I would advise (unless she repugnates you [2]), because they already know you there as my friend, so I would advise you to go to her Hôtel de Londres, Place Vendôme, if they are still in Paris, and ask me for the young princess to give you her name in writing... Tell me why; or Tscher, or Tcher? Or better yet, ask for M-elle Krauze, the governess. Say you want to make a mockery of the young X-nick, and ask that Miss Krauze (very pretty) to write you whether Elisabeth and whether Tschernischef or ff, as they are wont to write. Tell X-not her mother to tell, but I wish she wouldn't tell my daughter until I send her from here. If you don't want all this, then don't embarrass me; write that you don't want it, I'll find out otherwise, but don't make Schlesinger print the title yet; tell him I don't know the spelling yet. Still, I hope you can find a ticket from their home where their name will be written. As for moving, I'm glad you have an appart [ ement ]. You can take a sofa from the living room and leave the rest to Pelletan, 16 me Pigal[le]. I will have to take a bed from the dormitory, because décidément I will live in one of the pavilions of rue Pigal[le]. You won't have much left. Today I will write about it in detail. I'm closing because the post office is leaving, and I want my letter to Vienna this week must go. So in an hour I will write you a new letter according to us with details. Your Ch. [1] Propriété – here: exclusive publishing right. [2] Repugnuje (French repugner) - takes over with disgust. \r\n"
"My baby. So you want to move the furniture: from the living room I recommend you especially the shell. Since the drawer for this piece of furniture under the shells does not lock, take out if there is anything. Since it is a definite thing that I will live in one of the pavilions, I will also need a bed. Lumber, as notes, and whatever will hinder you, order everything to be moved to the rue Pigal[le]. You will need money for that. Well, if those 50 are not enough, let Jasio give you what he can. As for the house receipt, you will go to Pleyel, whom I have warned, who will give you money for rent. Give the porter 20 francs. from me and send all letters to rue Pigal[le] 16. The fountain (not you, but what is in the hall) may be useful to you; these sofas, though poor, are hussies from them [1] . I am sorry, dear, that I can serve you with such things, but even the most beautiful girl, as the saying goes, will not give only what she has. Don't be angry when you move. Don't forget my little treats from the fireplace. As for the pendula [2], take it, but I don't know if I'll leave it to you, but probably, because maybe I won't have a place to put it. Also, don't be exalted one day, so that you don't get stuck to the rest! Write to me if you see any other difficulties according to this. Here Pelletan of rue Pigal[le] will be made aware of it. As for Wessel, you have nothing? I'm reminded that if you didn't write his address (which I never know) on the envelope this time, he probably didn't get the letter. Let's wait. If by any chance you knew any butler, either Jasio, or Albrecht, or Alkan, or Grzymała; if you meet one, sometimes you will find it. But none from Charl, because there were cancans, and I, living in rue Pigal [le], need someone who would not be capricious and would not spoil the servants from the village who came from the village. It's all by accident. Maybe you'll learn something good at the Club. Tomorrow or the day after tomorrow I will send you a letter to mine. My father bows gracefully. Don't forget Troupenas. Do not be sour: already your zenith, just like my zenith of grief must have passed. We are over 30 years old. Your Miss Młokosiewicz, as my sister writes to me (when I asked about her), had an accident. She was sick. Some said that he had bloated liver, that he had dropsy; but they pumped out water or something else, and healthy, and thin, and shapely, as before. Nobody knows the truth. Our Nowakowski, who was supposed to come here, is already in Warsaw. content. Some girl from the Institute of governesses fell in love with him and he lost his place in the Institute. Recall that he is bald and much bigger than us, and he also makes conkets [3]! A good omen for us. Today 7 (2? am). Are you moving out on the 15th or sooner? You have one more week. I'll write to you if I remember anything violent. In particular, I beg you, do not forget to instruct the porter with 20 francs to send people and my letters to the rue Pigal [le]. I pity you. I see you in dust and disorder. But if I could be alone in Paris when I move, I certainly wouldn't bother you. Your old Ch. Homage to Leo, and don't forget to tell him to send to Mechetti by post, not by occasion. Give Hasslinger's letter to the post office yourself, not to Leon. [1] Hussy (from French housses) - covers. [2] Pendula (French pendule) - pendulum clock. [3] Make conquets (from French conquete) – conquer hearts."
"My baby. You must have received my letters and my compositions. You read the German letters, sealed them and did everything I asked of you, didn't you? As for Wessla now, he's a dummy, a cheater. What you want, write back, but tell me that I do not intend to give up my right to the Tarantella, because he did not send it back on time, and that if he lost money on my compositions, it was probably because of the stupid titles he gave despite my ban and despite the taunting of Mr. Stapelton; that if I had listened to my soul, I would not have sent him anything more after these titles. Get off as soon as you can. As for the transfer, today Mr. Pelletan on rue Pigal [le] officially notified by Mrs. Sand, who thanks you for a few polite words with the wallet. Take my letters to rue Pigal [le] 16 and tell the doorman very, very much. PS's son will be in Paris around the 16th, I will send you the manuscript of the Concerto and the Nocturnes through him. write. Rain and mud here. Hug Jasia. As for Antek, I think I told you that his illness is not so terrible and that there is much else. We'll probably see him soon, and he won't see his own. Love me the old way. write the word. Your Fryc."
"My baby. Take what you want with the furniture - we won't take care of our heads when I arrive. As for Czernyshevna, it's good that you left X-żna, because she's been X-żna for several months. As for Schlesinger, we will have to submit. “But as for Troupenas, it cannot be. So if Masset refuses you, say that you are not authorized [words crossed out] to dispose of Paris only, and that you do not know what my Paris price will be. As for the valet, I doubt that a porter will do me any good. This is Jasia's thought - I don't want this footman in advance. I forgot that he had already provided me with one, which choked Kondeusz. – He is so good that he will recommend it to the first person he meets on the street. Ask Albrecht or someone else. Write about Troupenas. Young Maurice is no longer going to Paris as he was supposed to, so I will send you the manuscript by post any day now. As well as a letter to Parents and address rue de Provence. I don't know. Write me again. – Give the doorman rue Tronchet a paw and let him send letters back to rue Pigal [le] 16. When I will return, I don't know. I won't need any curtains, so do what you want. You're a fool if you think I'm counting any of your debts. If you had possessions in Kujawskie, I might demand that there be thousands of them. As for the sale of furniture, I would be a fraud, a Jew like Dr. Wołowski, to sell old lumber - let them serve you. Slowly, when you buy a better one, you'll give it back to me, anyway, don't let your English bile upset you; and I'm not as dumb as you think, and I won't do anything either to embarrass you or anything like that. Adieu, my darling, maybe in a month. Ch."
"My baby. You did something, you did well. Strange world! Kiep Masset, kiep and Pelletan. Masset knew about Paccini's Waltz and that I had promised Gazeta. I didn't want to take a single step before him. If he does not want 600 with London (the price of my ordinary manuscripts was 300 francs with him) 3 times 5 = 15. So I would give so much work for 1500 francs, it is not possible. All the more so because I told him when I had the first conversation with him that things might happen, however, which I would not be able to give at this price. And so, for example, he could not claim that I gave him, for example, 12 Etudes or Une Méthode de piano for 300 francs. sold. The same is Allegro maestoso, which I send you today, I can't give him 300 francs. only for 600. As well as that Fantasy, for 500. And I will leave him the Nocturne, the Ballade and the Polonaise for 300 each, as he already had the ones he had printed in the past. In a word, these 5 things are mine for Paris, 2000. If he doesn't care about them, then (entre nous [1]) I prefer them, because Schlesinger will buy them most willingly, but I wouldn't want him to think of me as someone who doesn't follow some conventions. II n'y avait qu'une convention tacite d'honn?te homme ? honn?te homme [2] , so don't let him complain about my conditions, because they are very light, especially since I haven't published anything for a long time. I just don't want to get out of this position properly. I know I'm not selling. But tell him, if I wanted to profit from it or trick him, I would write, 15 bad things a year, which he would buy me for 300, and I would have more income. Would it be fairer? My dear, tell him that I rarely write, I spend little; don't think I'm expensive, but when you see my manuscript flies, you'll say that I can ask for 600 when I got 300 for the Tarantella (500 for the Bollero). For God's sake, please respect my manuscript and don't tar or tear me (everything you can't do, but I write because I love my written boredom so much). Rewrite. Yours will stay in Paris. Tomorrow you will get the Nocturne, and at the end of the week the Ballade and Fantasy; I can't finish it enough. If you are bored with rewriting, do it for the forgiveness of your great sins, because I would not like to give this spider web to any fat copyist. Once again, I recommend you, because if I had to write these 18 pages again, I would go crazy. But don't forget!!!... I am sending you a letter to Härtel. Get me a butler there other than the one you have. Probably in the first days of the 9th I will be in Paris. I will write you tomorrow. write. Your Ch. Having read your letter, I see that he is asking about Paris itself, so elucidate [3] this issue as much as you can, just sing to him 3,000 pour les 2 pays (and 2,000 for Paris alone), if he asks you very much, because la condition des 2 pays [4] lighter for him and more convenient for me: if he does not turn out as he wanted, it may be because he will take it as a pretext of rupture [5] with me. So let's wait for his letter from London. Always write sincerely and always be very polite with him, my darling, handle him; be cold, but not for me. Ch. [1] Entre nous – between us. [2] Il n'y avait... honn?te homme - it was only a mutual agreement between honest people. [3] Eluduj (French eluder) – get away, do it evasively. [4] Pour les 2 pays - for two countries; la condition des 2 pays - condition for two countries. [5] Reptura - here: severing relations."
" think Wednesday. My darling, thank you for your kind note - I wish things could work out - Masset surprises me that he thinks less than 300 francs. I will get for the manuscript. And then, when [with] London I want nothing to do, why pour les 2 pays 300 fr. more. - Deceivers, Jews - but never mind. I haven't made up my mind yet whether to go to Schl[esinger] - but since I'll be in Paris probably around the 2nd or 3rd of the 9th, it might be better to stop the negotiations. I'm waiting for your letter today with the details, and I'll admit to you that perhaps it's better that I back off and be free. I recommend you my Allegro once again. Don't show it to Wolf, because he will always snatch something there and print it first - so don't believe his Miskonier or anything that belongs to him - remember Pociejowo. Even if he did, he'd mess it up instead of fixing it. It is an axiom that you know as well as I do, I write it unnecessarily, but it is not worth erasing. I'll send you other stuff soon. I finished Fantasy today - and the sky is beautiful, my heart is sad - but that's okay. If it were otherwise, perhaps my existence would be of no use to anyone. Let's hide after death. nb. not in the sense of Le Roux - because then the younger a person kills himself, the more right he is. ""So don't bring any bad thoughts, I'm going to dinner."" Your old Ch. Write, Hug Jasia."
"My baby. We are definitely coming on Monday, that is, on the 2nd, at 2 o'clock in the afternoon, and maybe at 5 or 6 o'clock for unforeseen things. You offered me your help according to the device rue Pigal[le]. I don't want that, thank you, but I would ask too much of your goodness; but what I will ask of you is to be here on Monday from 2nd rue Pigal[le]. Also look there first, see Pelletan and how things stand. There is Moreau and his wife, Mrs. Sand's servants, whom she dismissed from here and sent back to Paris with permission to live on rue Pigal [le] until they find a place or a flat. If they are still there, be sure to see Pelletan, to whom Mrs. Sand wrote about it, so that they necessarily move out before Monday, even Sunday, that is better. If he, Pelletan, is very busy (because he publishes the new newspaper ""Le 19 Si?cle""), take care to open the windows (unless it's raining) and ventilate the pavilion of P. Sand especially. To make fire on the chimneys and in the furnace a few days in advance. If Moreau, whom Mrs. Sand can keep on arrival for a few days (e.g. as an incoming, without a wife, but not as a resident, which Pelletan was supposed to tell him). If this Moreau is available [1], he knows the service [2] P. Sand well, so just make sure he opens the windows and sets fire to the chimneys. If that Moreau (as Pelletan will tell you) is not available, let Mr. Armand the porter and his wife (very good-natured) take care of it, and you see to it, nb. having put up with Pelletan, who, poor thing, is losing his head with his new journal and has no time to look after it materially. Tell him about his journal, he is a kind and learned man, and be friendly with him, and don't be angry with me, or him, or yourself, or anyone. As for the lackey, keep tense, keeping none, for I don't know if he likes it; because at least it's mine, but living next door, it's different there. En tout cas [3] on arrival porters good people and helpful; manage [4] them and let them know, or better yet, give them a hand if they are to take care of the apartment and not Moreau. However, if it doesn't make you a subjection. ""It'll be alright."" - My old proverb. Anyway, time is running out, the world is passing, death is chasing and my manuscript is chasing you. Take your time with this, my dear, because I prefer that they wait for them in Leipzig, as if they would find dust, or stuffiness, or dampness on a visitor when they are not in Pigal[le] cold. Don't care about my apartments or my den or anything. Tomorrow I'll take care of it myself, and I won't bother you any more. It's for revanche, as when you need similar proofs of friendship. Let your old bald head meet my withering nose and let us sing: Long live Krakowskie Przedmieście! on the note of Bogusławski, tenor by Krzysztofowicz, accompaniment of the late Lenz. Your old Ch. Write either today, that is Friday, or not at all. My life. Go to my hatter Dupont, No. 8 rue de Montblanc, and have him make a hat for Monday. He always makes me hats. They know me there and they don't need a measure, but definitely for Monday. Tell the porter of rue Pigal[le] not to send me any more letters here. [1] Disposable - available. [2] Service - here: duties of the service. [3] En tout cas - in any race. [4] Menage - here: behave well, be considerate."
"My baby. Thank you for Masset's letter. ""You must have already told me, and if not, then tell me that you wrote to me and that I am very sorry, but I can't in any way."" ""Then don't take it against me that I'll have to have intercourse with someone else."" – Concerning the Prelude to Schl[esinger's Album, I told Mrs. Masset last time – but don't pick up that lievre (hare). ""I'm sending you two Nocturnes, and the rest on Wednesday."" My departure from here is late, so I won't be in Paris until around 6 or 8. Rewrite, please, because winter is coming. ""You'll get the rest the day after tomorrow."" Your old Ch. Write, honey. Hug Jasia. Maybe there are still no flats or crosses there."
 Gentlemen. I am sending you my 4 manuscripts of Allo de Concert - op. 46 Ballade - 47 2 Nocturnes - 48 Fantasy - 49 Please reply to me after receiving them. Dedicated to you, F. Chopin.
Earlier today, I thought 1am, not 2am, so tell me whether to wait or send for you.
 promised you a few words in the evening yesterday, but I did not see Soliva, and today the more I think about what you told me yesterday, the more I regret that you have just honored me with your trust in a thing about which, I see, I cannot judge. I have given you good-naturedly, at your request, not light-hearted advice, but after careful consideration. And once again I will repeat to you that from what I have had the pleasure of hearing (not judging by the timbre, because you are tired of travel and the Paris catarrh), I conclude that you have an extremely expansive voice, very pure intonation and feeling - the most important attributes of a great talent - and that more art of singing won't hurt. That's why I told you my sincere opinion about Bordogni, that he won't teach you more, an opinion I stick to, and that's why I gave you the advice I thought best. I was wrong, because it's not about science, but about the name. I should have guessed that, but it happened. Count on me and my sincere favor in any other case, but I have recommended Mrs. Soliva too much, and I value her more than Bordogni, to ask you today to refuse me the same thing that I wished so much a few days ago and wanted him for. bored his soul. Forgive me and believe my true service in any other circumstance, nb. after an honest conversation. F. Chopin. I am waiting for your reply and will send it to you soon.
"Dear Gentlemen. I have just received a letter from you gentlemen with a check payable on December 13 and please accept my thanks for their punctuality. As for the numbers on the manuscripts, they are placed correctly. Mechetti in Vienna has the Prelude to his Beethoven Album and the Polonaise. I have instructed Schlesinger to consult with you on the release date; he has already begun to engrave, and I believe that the gentlemen also wish it to happen soon. I am not sending you an address in London, because I am forced to break with Wessel, and I have not made a final deal with anyone yet, but don't let this disturb you in your work. I also ask you to put my Nocturnes in the title instead of Miss Emilia - Miss Laura Duperré. Sincerely devoted to Fr. Chopin."
"My dearest Frederick. You hurried with wishes for Papeczki's name day, and we again with wishes for the new year. May God give you everything you can only desire and let us see you! Mrs Stefanowa Wiesiołowska, your godmother, wrote to me only to visit her this year. Imagine that she saw some Mr. Śmitkowski, who knew you and had recently returned, and reportedly told her that you would like to see your parents next spring, so he writes to us as soon as possible and asks not to forget about her; what further confirmed her in this thought was that there was a letter for her in the post office from Paris at that time, and the servant lost it while carrying it. Confident that you will come to her, and kind and happy, she writes to me that if there is this project, choose her and bring it to fruition. I confess to you that she cordially obliged us; I'll leave her to think that maybe the letter was from you, but somehow I don't think so, because you're too lazy and too busy for that. After all, there are still people with a heart who remember the proofs of our parents' friendship and love them together with us. But there are many people who have forgotten what was done for them, and only in need will they remember again, and we are always one. - You won't believe what fairy tales there were about the evening, and from people from here, like you. Mrs. Maciej's sister-in-law has returned; Oleś and her mother told me that she told them that you were in great favors (the news of their cousin arrived) with the queen and the court and that you had some delicious service; because they gave geld to others, and you did not dare, because they know that you will not accept; but since you did not take it, you only asked that, if they wanted to please you, they should send it here to Father. I barely snorted in my nose with laughter: when a story is good, it makes sense. It is good, at least, that at least in human opinion you can even reveal your wishes there, and it will certainly be as you demand. Our Mrs. Dekert spoke well: ""Stupids are not sown and are born"", but it is not lawful to come from you like that. Nak[waska] is said to put visicatories on her face; this is desperation! Méry miraculously cured *; is it true? Completely healthy, message from Mrs. Lewocka. Thank God. Also, tell us if it's true. He was already well fed, he was already with us on Christmas Eve, and he went out for the first time on Papki Name Day; good old man. – You have no idea what kind of festival for children this Christmas is here now, and how Uncle and Aunt spoil the drums, what trinkets, notebooks, books! And Grandma and Grandpa! And this, and that! The children were so happy that little Frycek got up on his feet that day to get to the table set with various things as soon as possible. Frycek reminded us of you and we were together in thought and broke the wafer with you; but I just wish it was real for once in my life before I die. I hug you, kiss you a million times on each finger; play, write, don't miss lessons, love us and let people love you. Adieu. LJ Your husband hugs you warmly. Children kiss hands. To all my acquaintances, starting with Méry, bow down! [Addendum to the place marked with an asterisk] Et quel temps fut jamais plus fertile en miracles! [1] [1] Et quel temps... miracles - were there ever times more prolific in miracles."
" received your letter of the 4th, my dear Fryderyk, exactly a week after my name day; it gave me great pleasure, and I thank You for Your good wishes, because knowing Your heart I do not doubt their sincerity. May Heaven reward you for them, watch over you, give you happiness and keep the respect of honest people. These are our permanent wishes, not only at the beginning of the year. On Christmas Eve and Christmas Day we were all together. It was worth seeing the joy of children at the sight of a star. How much fun you would have had if you had been with us. We have thought a lot about this, because believe me, we do not stop talking about you, you are the subject of our conversations constantly. You tell us, my dear, that you were at the evening, but you were not in a good mood; I confess that this alarmed us, we feared that you were unwell, though you assure us that you are well. As for us, our afflictions bother us, but at least they do not increase much; the pleasure of meeting often is a joy in our old age, and each of your letters contributes not a little to it. So we give thanks to Heaven for giving us such good children. Don't be angry if I cause trouble and waste your time by referring several people to you, but how to avoid it and excuse myself when they trust you so much? It would seem ill will on our part, all the more so since these people consider your advice as a means of perfecting themselves in the arts that will ensure their livelihood; so don't be angry about it. I don't know if Thalberg is already in Paris, you will see him for sure. I think I told you in one of my letters that he had shown us many considerations during his stay here, maybe you will overcome your disgust, I assure you that he spoke very flatteringly about you. I am curious about one thing, whether you saw Liszt after his article, and whether you are together as well as before; it would be a pity if there was some cooling in your friendship. By the way, since we're talking about him: I was asked if it's true that people say about his arrival here with Mrs. Sand; all I could answer was that you did not say anything about it in your letter. If he comes here, I hope he will visit us, and I will give him the pleasure of playing the instrument that so melodiously reflected your inspirations (this happy time has passed). Izabela takes great care of this instrument and wouldn't give it up for anything in the world. Your godfather and his wife visited us on my name day; I have not seen him for several months; I don't know why it's so cold to us. However, they inquired a lot about you, but we said little about his son, he only told us that he would go with his wife to Dresden to visit his uncle, and that they would not return until February. As you know, mother is there with Antoś; in all likelihood the whole family will be there. – I recently met Dr. Kuczkowski, he greets you most beautifully. Good-hearted Elsner is healthy and keeps for you well-known feelings of friendship. Many of your old acquaintances commend themselves to your memory, the litany would be too long if I wanted to list them. One more thing: what happened that you change the servant; you were so pleased with your Louis. God grant that you find someone suitable, because you need a man who would be able to watch over everything, and sparingly, because I am happy to think that you remember to save a penny for a rainy day. You see I haven't forgotten my song. How are you feeling in your new apartment? How's your winter? We have had no frost so far, only foul weather; I'm not leaving my house. ""I think I have taken up enough time for you to read my scribbles, so I give you the pen of one of your sisters, assuring you that your good and loving mother and I embrace you very warmly."" Ch. Many beautiful greetings from us to Mrs. Nakw[aska], to Méry, whom I congratulate on his recovery, and to Jaś, as well as to Julian. In case anyone is going, I hope you will take the opportunity to send me what you promised; I can compare the similarity."
 bring you a good day and a complaint about Szulczewski's address - no coachman, no omnibus conductor, no book with streets know about la rue de la Vrillerie, which was sent to me, please have it rectified - Your Ch.
 Dear friend, send me the remaining volumes of Fétis - but tonight - will you? - at least as late as possible. Your Ch.
 Dearest. Please would you personally choose a piano for Miss Kologrivoff. Please give me this pleasure. I feel better and I squeeze the Lord's hand. Chopin.
" My dear Lord. I have one ticket to Inwalidów. If I could please you, I would be very happy about it. ""But if you cannot use it, please send it to me by messenger."" Lord E. Legouvé."
" have to lie down all day, my mouth and glands hurt so much. “You won't believe how sorry I am that I couldn't be on Roul yesterday. - If Raciborski lets me go out tomorrow (because Jaś was bleeding today and he's lying down himself), I'll go to you right away. About the fort. I do not know anything. ""But the other morning I had Piero's prescript used."" Write a word about your health - is it better? I will pray here. Ch."
 Dearest. This is what Mr. Onslow writes to me. “I wanted to come and tell you myself, but I feel very weak and am going to bed. I love you more and more if that's possible. Chopin. Please don't forget friend Herbeault. Until tomorrow then. I'm expecting both gentlemen.
"My dear Frycunieczek, we are all healthy, Ludwika and her kids have returned home safely and healthily, which makes us very happy, because we missed her without her too, having not seen her for over three months. Your friend, little Fryc, a delightful kid, starts talking; you know how much he amuses us with his chattering. Papa had the consolation of the grapes, and the pleasure that his daughters and grandchildren had tasted the fruit of his labour. You won't believe how much this little garden of ours gives us, especially our parents. Adam Goltz, the one who wanted to get to know you and didn't see you, marries Tyklówna, daughter of Feliks, the one who stayed under Ludwika's care. We enjoy this relationship; it looks like they'll both be good for each other. “You must be in Paris already; I want it so much, because I don't know why, but I'm most at ease when you're sitting here. I don't know if it's because I like the city so much, but it always makes me feel better when you come back to it. My husband is healthy, he bows to you and embraces you heartily. Not a day goes by that we do not think and speak of you several times, our whole comfort is caressed by the pleasant thought of you. Autumn is my favorite season, the nicer because Mom does not suffer from rheumatism, and Papa, although coughing as usual, does not lose his sobriety and when he has company, he gains a good mood and forgets about the annoying cough. - Write to us, my only one, do not mind that we are late with the copy, but only waiting for Ludwika's arrival, so that you can hear a few words from her as well. Bow down to all of us friends. Isabella."
"Dear Lord Frederick! Despite the fame that all Europe has covered you, I am sure that your heart has preserved the memory of old friends, among whom I have the good fortune to count. Our good rector Elsner deigned to write to Mr. Fryderyk, and I was waiting for a letter in his boarding house and I am writing to you by asking you to be a guardian and mentor of my children, the Turczynowiczs, there in Paris; perhaps with the help of Mr Fryderyk they will dance there and remind you of the dances and notes of the land where you were born and which boasts of you. A true friend and servant of J. Damse. My younger daughter feasts me with your Nocturnes."
 My dearest Life. By God, did you order me to hire your cira [1] for tomorrow? Please, bring it to me tomorrow and drop by yourself for a moment, and you will do well. Your Ch. [1] Cira (French cireuse) - here: cleaner.
"My dearest Frederick. Only today do we congratulate you and wish you for March 1 and 5; we didn't write, because we were waiting for the letter, and knowing about the concert, we thought later that you were waiting to inform us, and so it happened. Thank God that there is a letter, because it was very much needed for my parents' health and peace of mind. I prefer a review from the Gazette de France. ""Musicale"" was no match for last year's one. There is always one Fryc, whom they will be astonished not a hundred times and ecstasy, as they were over the last compositions, which, Nowakowski said, were extraordinary, more beautiful than your most beautiful. It's good that the musical world is content; they are happy that maybe when you start to make yourself heard, and they ask. let them wait; maybe they will wait, as I do in the thought of seeing you when. My dearest, thank you for Turo[owska] and Wasi[lewski], both contented, satisfied, delighted; Very good. When Meyerbeer wrote that, don't be surprised too, especially since I know myself less and was more connected because of you. Your definition is perfect, but maybe after some work it will be possible; a pretension strange to figuring the town of Viardot Garcia. Poverty is this self-love. If you had her instead of proper dignity, you would not be what you are. Keep up the fame and friendship and respect of the world; be healthy, cheerful, happy; may you never be lacking in anything and love us, and to make up for beloved Papka une poire pour la soif (although you don't like it at all); these are our wishes. “My dear, you already know about our sadness. You won't believe how much we miss, because nothing can replace this habit; good old man, and he finished with me. Finding out late about his weakness, I went to see him the next morning. Coming up, I tell him we're so sorry we didn't know; daughter-in-law or what, he says that uncle suddenly fainted, we only on Wednesday, etc., and he said: Tuesday, and that was the last word. Then the old man lost consciousness and soon finished; I came in at a quarter to 10 in the morning, and by 10? he was gone. It's always in front of your eyes. Pity him; he didn't die as he wanted; many philanthropic thoughts he had buried with him, and the key that he had tied to his handkerchief passed into the hands of those attached to it. Judging by themselves, they were afraid of us, and the old man had no consolation that for six days he was ill and saw who we were; only on the eve of his death, and if the same doctor who used to visit him had not visited his parents, only after his death would we have known that he was after him, because even the host of the house did not know about his weakness for several days. – My father is very troubled, the more so that in one year: Brucki, Ży[wny], and Siebert. – Artôt made a sensation with your Mazurka; what was going on in the theater? My father burst into tears and coughed nothing. Artôt sent a lodge, polite, tribu[t]rendu par tous les artistes[1] because of their franc to your parents[?]. Nak[waska] is surprised that I don't write back, and I was surprised what to write back to. Now things are clear, if you find it, send it; it seems to be coming back. – It is no longer acceptable that in Paris they should not know how many daughters George S. has; why should Warsaw be surprised if strange things are written. – We have a lot of authors and writers here now; they write and read and talk a lot! – I am going to Ciechocinek with my children this year; I will be silent from the border, near Szafarnia, Toruń, somewhere he used to stay. ""What are you doing with yourself?"" Who knows, maybe you won't see Lebrun, the doctor and his wife, this summer, because they're going to your place; she's happy for you. Many people will see you before it's our turn; only to come! - Adieu, my dear, write faster, because you have no idea what restlessness is. Be well, love us. We hug you both from the heart. The kids kiss hands. - Kudos to all my friends. Is this the right thing this 6-year-old pianist is doing in Paris? [1] Tribu[t] ...artistes – duty given by all artists."
My dear Mr. Chopin. I was going to surprise you by publishing an article about your concert in the press. I wrote an article, but they cut it up so thoughtlessly with scissors that there was nothing left but a few scraps of sentences and my good intentions. Please try to see only good intentions in these few poems that appeared yesterday, Tuesday. Fortunately, I am sure that when it comes to praising the Lord, opportunities will not be lacking. I'll get better soon. Adieu. E. Legouve.
"Dear Fryderyk. After all, after three months have passed, we have received the longed-for letter from you. You gave a concert, we knew from the newspapers that you would give it and that you had already given it, the more sad that nothing from you; it is not supposed that you did not find an hour free for such a long time to tell your parents about yourself and find out about them. You've upset us a lot, probably unintentionally. You have forgotten, dear child, that your old Parents live only for you and ask God every day for health and blessings for you, and they do not stop thanking Him for His benefits poured out on you. Health, good fortune, fame that you experience, everything comes from his most holy providence: how should you be grateful to him daily with us, and you will see that he will help you in all your good intentions, and you will be happy. Do not resent the Father for always reminding you of the future; believe me, it's time to think about it a bit. We, as old people, tell you this from experience, and those who care for you, we would like to see you happy and at peace; and it's hard to get it when there's not even anything guaranteed for later. – I was thinking about you very much, my dear child, on your birthday and name day, and I sent you my wishes in my soul, praying for your prosperity. May God bless you and keep you always in his care. - My dear, I have a request for you, i.e. business, because a mother should not ask a child, and a good and sincere child, if it can without prejudice to its own needs, and God forbid a loan for that, should say openly: yes or no. I hope that's what you'll do to me, because if it weren't for that, I would never have mentioned it to you. Such a thing: I owe three thousand Polish zlotys; Father doesn't know it; if he knew, he would be very worried, and naturally they must be returned, so if you are able to send them, not all together, but partially, within a year, then write to me on Barcinski's hand. You will say to yourself: now I see why my mother urges me to save money; believe me, not for my sake, but for your sake. I hug you heartily, a truly loving mother."
"My life! I hope this letter will find you happier than it has passed. Here's some health. Beautiful time. Tomorrow, the day after tomorrow, we expect good old Delacroix. He will live in your room. Pardon me if I ask you again to send a letter to the Viennese editor, but as far as it seems to me, Austria must be franked. They'll tell you about it on board. I am asking you for this favor, because in this letter my manuscript is painstakingly written: I do not want to entrust it to any uncertain fate. I won't bore you with any comics anymore, because I know how unpleasant it is. ""May you all be well."" Be well, don't be upset. Your old Ch. [George Sand Postscript - Translation] \r\n My fat man, be well and love us. We read, we work, we act. Time passes quickly, and if I were not to find you in Paris, I would like to keep it, because the countryside is good for me. Wouldn't you like to spend a few days with us? try it. I do not know a freer man than you, who would burden himself with so many duties. Goodbye, we love you regardless of your ingratitude. [Postscription by Maurycy Dudevant - Translation] Broken. Break yourself if it makes you happy. [Adding Solange Dudevant - Translation] Good morning. Solange."
"My dear Frederick. Your letter of the 25th last month gave us double pleasure; firstly, he reassured us after three months of silence on your part - and we would have been in a much more unpleasant position if Mrs. Wasilewska had not encouraged us after receiving letters from her son, who was very flattered that you had received him so well; secondly, by bringing us the news that you gave a musical evening which, judging by the clippings you sent, pleased your listeners. I wholeheartedly congratulate you on your success, mainly because it clearly shows that you are maintaining your position among the artists, and secondly, because of an income which will undoubtedly allow you to spend a few months in the country during the summer, when the number of lessons is usually reduced and when you can rest after your hardships. I will not write you anything about saving and thinking about tomorrow, except that if we could save more, it would be better for us, although we are satisfied anyway. I did not leave the house for almost the whole winter, but I was at a concert by Artôt, who undoubtedly remembered us for your sake and sent us a box. I listened with pleasure when one of your Mazurkas played – it made a sensation. Kind Elsner, who always remembers you, came to visit us on your name day; his wishes are sincere, he favors you the most. Count Mycielski, who was in Karlsbad at the same time as us, paid us a visit; hopes to see you one day. He told us that you repeated your promise to one of his relatives who was in Paris. We are sure that you would be well received in those parts. Liszt was not here yet; they say that he left Berlin via Königsberg for Russia, and that only when he returns from there will we have the pleasure of hearing him here. I confess that I did not expect from him what you write to me about him, and the mention made of him and Thal[berg] in the articles about your evening will not contribute much to your rapprochement. What to do in similar circumstances? This is to act with your customary prudence and delicacy, not yielding even a step. You can be dignified and let it all fall to him. But enough about that. I assure you that you will give me great pleasure not to keep me waiting so long for news about you. Here is my 72nd year coming to an end; may, with the little life left to me, I may at least have the pleasure of reading your letter from time to time. Write to me about yourself, about everything that concerns you, after all, it is the only thing that can interest me. Summer is coming - what are you going to do? Will you stay in Paris? Won't you do some excursion? Finally, write to us as extensively as time allows - but do not waste precious moments. Believe that we do not forget about you; Your mother, a mother who loves you, writes a few words to you despite her severely impaired eyesight. I kiss you with all my heart. Ch. PS Ernst visited us and sent me a ticket to his concert."
"My soul, send me the next ""Revues"", that is, from March and April, I will return these because I have read them. I'm not going out at all, so please borrow for the weak. I kiss you SW \r\n"
"Dear Chopin. Do you know that I'm devilishly jealous of you? Everywhere you turn, everything that bears the name of a woman speaks of Chopin: Do you know Chopin? God, how I would like to meet Chopin! Here, too, under the influence of the incredible charm of your name, I am writing these few words. Miss Kologrivoff goes to Paris to listen to good music and study a bit; being herself a proficient and talented musician, she is able to appreciate the Lord and take advantage of your excellent guidance. So may the Lord be so kind as to help her a little by his influence and receive her as the Lord can. Needless to say, I require revenge on my part; in anticipation of the opportunity, please accept my most sincere thanks as well as assurances of affection and affection. J. Artôt."
My life! Please, drop this letter to Solange in the small post office, and to mine in the boarding school. Come if only so that I don't bore you with my commissions. Here's a headache from the time of the railroad, which in Orleans blows people into the mud instead of onto the street. I'm quite well. The gun too. I hug you most sincerely. Ch. write. [Position George Sand - Translation] My fat old man, be well, love us, come see us. Post this word to my daughter. We love you and hug you.
 If it is necessary to obtain a passport of official documents, you have Gutt's Ruthenian and German passport here, just be kind, don't lose it. I recommend your activities. A benevolent stalker. A. Mickiewicz.
Dear Fryderyk. The givers of this are Konstancja and Roman Turczynowicz, dancers of our theater, children of Mr. Damse, a dramatic and very useful artist, and even a rich composer of music at our theaters, who asked me to recommend them to you, to your heart, etc. during their stay in Paris, waiting for it at this moment next to me, in my room. I complete it willingly, because they are worthy of your friendship and I can repeat in writing again that I love you and your beloved person as I value no one higher. Please accept the assurance of who I am and will be Your true servant and friend. Joseph Elsner. I am sending you as proof Ave Maria.
Dear Madam, here are the letters for August - I have been promised even more, which I will have the honor to send to you when I receive them. Please accept my respect. Chopin. To the Consul of Spain - from Mrs. de Marliani, to Mr. Chaissains from whom I do not remember, to Mr. Duffour from our friend Albrecht, to Mr. Dumas, Mrs. and Mr. Durnes from Mrs. Albrecht.
 Dearest Friend. I have just received the piano, for which I thank you very much. The instrument arrived well tuned, quite in a concert tuning fork. I don't play it much at the moment because the weather is so nice that I'm still almost outdoors. I wish you equally pleasant weather during your holidays. Please write me a few words (if you think that you did not use the pen often enough during the day). I wish you all good health - I am laying at the feet of your mother and sister. Dedicated to Mr. Fr. Chopin.
My baby. Tomorrow night we are going to Paris behind the apartment. Saturday night I'll be in Rue Pigalle. I stay here for a day. Miss de Rozi?res came here today and will stay with Solange for a few days. The mail is leaving, so I'm not writing you any more. I hope to find you well. Your old F. Ch. You're not doing well [George Sand] because he has guests from the city.
"If you still need a servant, I have two; one Paweł, who once served with the Platers and with the duchy. Plater still praises him and I actually have nothing against him, but first I prefer to recommend you another one. His name is Jan, he served with the Pusłowskis, now he is with Jędrus in the club, and since he is paid so little and has to gray the dresses he obviously respects, he is looking for other servants; I hear the lad is very decent and knows the servants. If you want, tell Jedrus, through whom I am writing this, to send it to you. You see that I remember the cat better than the cat about Semiramis. SW"
My baby. Tomorrow, Thursday, at my place at 5? or 6 o'clock in the gold coffee [1] (de la cité) in my study. Then we will go to P. Marl[iani]. As for Dawn - there was a great fog yesterday, today I expect the sun and before evening I will send you word. May God keep you in his care. Your old Fr. [1] Coffee (from French cave) - cellar.
"My dear Frederick. If I waited so long to answer, it was not because of indifference or some illness, but because we expected your sister's return from day to day. I wanted her to be able to write to you, knowing that after seeing the entire Wodziński family, she would have a lot to tell you. We were pleased to learn from your last letter that the country air has strengthened your health, that you hope you will endure the winter well and that you have changed your apartment because yours was too cold. But won't you be lonely if other people don't move? You don't mention it. You know that Antoś has not written to me yet, although I asked his father to remind him of it. He seems to have lost his memory, if he ever had one, under the influence of his Dulcinea. Probably, although the [family] doesn't like it, the case will end up in a marriage. The future couple is in Toruń. As for business, I intend to write directly to my father to know what to hold on to, for I am in quite a difficult position. You tell me that Méry is healthier, we congratulate him on that. So you have prophets in your country? It's lucky to find people gullible enough to believe it in this century. But what does a man not do to deceive his neighbor? But enough about that. – So you found yourself having dinner with L[isztem]; I know your caution, you do very well not to break with him in spite of all his boastfulness; you were friends, it is beautiful to outdo each other in delicacy. That you did not respond to the invitation of the committee does not surprise me, it would be thought that you are following in the footsteps of others, and you do not need an example in this regard. It's a pity you couldn't take Ernst, he showed us a lot of consideration; when you see him, give him a thousand greetings from us. - As for us, I'll tell you that if it weren't for my cough, which is becoming more and more unbearable day by day, I would feel about right; as for your dear mother, she is quite well this time of year. I go out very rarely, only to our garden; we had various kinds of fruit in it, including some grapes, which I cultivated myself and which were perfectly ripe. It reminded me of the beautiful vintage season, which I'm sure you enjoyed as well. Now that you're back home, don't forget to write to us and tell us your address. I have no doubt that you will receive this letter, although it was sent to the old address. Be well, my dear child, both my mother and I embrace You warmly, pressing You to our heart with all the strength that we have left. Ch. Many greetings to Mr. Méry. What is happening with Mrs. Nakw.; did she give you back what she said she owed you? Her governess's brother visited me several times. He came here to teach, and I think he'll find a good place. I met Mr. Skibicki several times, he asked a lot about you; widowed a few months ago; reminds you of your memory. Your godfather, Elsner, who is going to Vienna, and many other friends send you greetings."
"My dearest Frederick. This week, I came back from a three-month trip around the world; I spent two months on a children's treatment in Ciechocinek, and for one month I visited the Romocki family and visited the entire Dziewanowski family, young and old. They remember you fondly everywhere. Already in Szafani your homemade benches do not exist, only imitations with a nice memory of you. The rain was heavy when I was there; I couldn't explore the whole garden, which seemed pretty enough to me. Everyone told you to give you a hug, from Ciocia Ludwina to Domuś, who already has two lovely Domusiątki. “Thank God you are well, rather healthier. This news is our regal [1] . I also found everyone healthy here; you understand my joy after such a long absence, where there was no letter in a week, restlessness and fear for the health of our dearest and most honest beings. My children are healthy; I just don't know if past sufferings won't come back over time. - Ciechocinek are houses thrown here and there in a sandy desert, but somehow time was passing more pleasantly for me there than for many people, because I had enough friends. Papa and Mama are known almost all over Poland, you - through Europe, so it's very easy for me and Izabela ? ce titre [2] to find friends who will be the first to come to us with her; so many unknown people I had good acquaintances, including: Mrs. Gałczyńska, cousin of Wiktor Kurnatowski, and Mr. Unrug, his sister, who know you and were with the family in Ciecho[cinek]. The Weltz family and even Antoś Wo[dziński] inquired very carefully about you, but I saw this elsewhere; now he spends most of his time in Toruń, because his bella is there too. Wedding maybe this month; they are to buy an estate in Prussia and settle there or in the Duchy. Old Discontents, all; only they are satisfied, but since it's so close to the end, it's going to be good. In my opinion, neither of them guarantees happiness, and I told the lamenting old men that; both he and she are kind, but each needs someone else to think of them. Mother considers it a punishment from God, which I fixed, and that's good, although futura [3] is a good creature; but I can't speak openly without talking openly. counts. the young [Treasures] have nothing young, she is suffering all the time. They absolutely wanted to go to them, they both begged very much; what a lot that he went for it, because always in many respects, as you remember him. They even sent an intentional 6 miles to me when they were supposed to send, but I wasn't there; not by rencuna [4], but no, and I also thanked you for the most tender invitation. I visited my mother and my old man a couple of times; I won't say that it didn't cost me blood, but somehow I was close, they were so polite, begging and begging that it was impossible to say no. I saw my mother on my way back, because they immediately let me know that she had arrived, as I was about to leave those parts soon; she was very kind to her heart, they were all together and everyone was happy with me, and I would have liked to know what everyone was thinking in their souls, and I reconciled the one with the other, and I regretted in my soul that I could not ask about it. Had I perhaps entertained myself longer, like so many other things, perhaps this one would have shone out; be that as it may, An[toni's mariage torments him for all his faults. May you only be healthy, peaceful and happy. They ask me if you're getting married, various people; others again say that you are definitely writing something big with Adam. Now, it's so easy to move from one place to another, I think that next year maybe we'll be able to talk more about everything. These are pears in the sky, but really, that again and not so dissimilar things, as long as there was health and something else. – The Wiesiołowskis are still in Strzyżewo. Dziewanowski near Toruń, all this is not dissimilar. – Your son is now our clown, because he starts babbling and is funny; those already big children, and there is still nothing in the head, but Barciński has good hopes for them, and when he vouches, you have to believe. – Izabela will tell you about herself; she took her second niece with her. I have a cousin of Józia Domusiowa with my tutor. Her father died and she is educated here; it will be until Easter, I was with her in the country. How various relationships people form and find themselves somewhere in the world. Józia Sumińska, whom I saw now, was asking a lot about you; he's behind that lady's uncle, behind Wilczewski, whose brother you may know there. Oleś said to hug you, I saw her yesterday; her husband is weak, her mother returns from the waters. Always a kind family with real friendship for us. They love you as they used to in those days; forget the comedy. – Healthy Titus and children; they are sitting in the countryside. – You know that Turowska married Leśkiewicz! I haven't heard from her yet after returning. I understand how you had to make music with the Viards! – The Lebruns are back; I'm sorry they never met you. I've heard of them, but haven't seen them yet. Adieu, my dearest Frederick. We are together again, thank God, again we only miss you, only you are our thoughts. Oh, that we could also embrace each other as soon as possible. Adieu, I hug you from my soul, love us only as we love you... Children's hands kiss you. Nowak[owski] and friends hug. ""Kiss again, adieu!"" Greetings to Mérego, we are glad that much is better. Nak[waska] in Dresden, but apparently suffering. We feel very much how you must miss good-natured Jasia, Apparently, de Rozi?res writes tender letters here and wonderfully sublime ones to Antoni Wodziński, but it's like peas on the wall. Not good. [1] Regal – literally: feast, delicacy. [2] ? ce titre – hence, for this reason. [3] Futura (from Latin) – future (wife). [4] Rencuna (from French rancune) – resentment."
"No, my dear Fryderyk, I don't want these dances: it would hurt my eyes, ears, and heart. I don't mind the two poor people that they go around the world for a piece of bread, it would be hard to demand that dancers not be dancers; but let others have fun with this view. Finally, maybe it's my quirk. Thank Mrs. S[and] for the memory, perhaps you will invite me to see Semiramis or some other opera by Mrs. Viardot. I'll see you in those days. Your Stefan."
Dear, always loved Mr. Elsner! You won't believe how much each letter and note of your pleasure gives me - thank you very much for the music sent by the Turczynowiczs. They succeeded here - many liked them - they should be happy about it - and Mr. Damse too, to whom I do not write back, but please, Lord, tell him how many of his children (as he calls them) made an effect here. I hug you cordially. I always love like a son, like an old son, like an old friend. Chopin. Mrs. Elsner, my respect and bows to all who surround you.
" Dear Chopin. I have been ill almost constantly since my return from the village; this prevented me from visiting the Lord. If the Lord would like to contribute to my recovery, please come to us for lunch on Sunday, December 4; we will be in a close family circle and only your nice and interesting student will be. A thousand friendly words from all of us in chorus. Fr. Kalkbrenner."
 received your letter, my dear Tomasz, and immediately asked my friends to ask about the harpist. So far, I haven't seen anyone who would like to go to you for this price, the more that you don't write to me whether you will pay him the way. As for the train driver, it seems to me to be a more similar matter, and yesterday Pillet, the director here, was said to be talking about whether by any chance there wasn't one of his who would be leaving. You see that you have been listened to and that I have taken care of your commission as much as I can, but I regret that so far to no avail. Love me the old way, like in Vienna at Leopoldstad. Write whether you pay the way to the harpist. It seems to me that it is necessary to decide, and always count on my old friendship. Hug Mr. Elsner and my friends. F. Chopin.
Madam. How grateful I am to you for your kind letter, to which I would have replied by sending the manuscript to Mr. Beale, had I not promised my new compositions to Mr. Wessel. – As for the waltz, which I had the pleasure of writing for you, please keep it – I beg – to yourself. I don't want it to see the light of day. Instead, I would like to hear you play it and attend one of your elegant parties where you so wonderfully render those who are the masters of all of us, great authors like Mozart, Beethoven and Hummel. Hummel's Adagio, which you played a few years ago in Paris at Erard's, still rings in my ears, and I assure you that there is little piano music - despite the great concerts here - that would make me forget with what pleasure I listened to you that evening. Please accept, Madam, the assurances of my respects, and kindly convey on my behalf assurances of friendship to Mr. Oury. Ch.
Dear Gentlemen. I have to offer you a Scherzo (for 600 francs), a Ballade (for 600 francs), a Polonaise (for 500 francs). Besides, I composed an Impromptu of several pages, but I do not even propose it, wishing to do a courtesy to one of my old friends, who has been asking me earnestly for two years for Mr. Hofmeister. I am telling you this so that you know my intentions in this matter. If my Scherzo, Ballade and Polonaise answer you, please write me a word by the nearest post, indicating the date when you would like me to send these works. Sincerely, Fr. Chopin.
 I expect you today a few minutes before 1. Chopin.
"Dear Doctor. Be kind enough to visit me today, I am suffering. [Adding George Sand - Translation] Dear Doctor. Chopin is very suffering. Perhaps you'd like to come tonight; the patient has a strong neuralgia which is painfully bothering him, and which you could put an end to by allowing him to spend a peaceful night. Devoted to G. Sand. Doctor Molin Rue de l'Arcade \r\n"
 I was at your place - I'm not at home today, my love. Fr. \r\n
 Oui, Oui, Oui - and at any time. The duchy will be at 9 o'clock - but for you we will start again 10 times.
"Dear Tomasz! No one wants to go to you for twice as much, but don't be surprised, because Labarre, whom I asked to help me in this matter, assured me that he could not send anyone to Lyon for a very good salary, so all artists like Paris . They prefer poverty here, how to live properly abroad or in the provinces. I am sorry that I have been of no use to you this time; nevertheless, let's make love the old way, like in Leopoldstad. Fr. Chopin."
"No intermediary is needed between Rellstab and you, dear old friend. Rellstab is a man of too much culture, and you are too well brought up, not to understand each other perfectly and immediately (although usually Artists and Critics do not communicate easily); since Rellstab, wanting to please me, agreed to take these few words, I ask him to remind you of me in a special way; I wish to take this opportunity to repeat to you, even if I seem boring to you, that my friendship and my adoration for you will always remain the same, and that you can dispose of me as a friend in all circumstances. F. Liszt."
Parents and sisters, and now Witwicki, write me so many good things about you - that I deeply regret that I did not have the pleasure of meeting and hearing her before I left Paris. Although I am thinking of staying here for a few more months, I do not lose hope of seeing you on my return and of becoming useful, if only in my power. Please accept the assurance of my best wishes. F. Chopin.
"My baby! You won't believe how the Spanish gossip got around me. Judge things as they are. You remember, one evening my mother was very angry with today's Agatha; it was the evening after which she decided to see the favorite. You defended her very much and did not share her enthusiasm for the one who was now in London, and who was then, as it was said, to be engaged for a grand opera. My mother told you that evening that you must be in love with Agatha... I don't know if you considered it, but it struck me, and that evening in her room I told her not to joke about it, because you do know Mrs. Agata, and nothing is easier than to make pate unpleasant for others and for you. Now, believe it or not, as much as I love my mother, I have said nothing else to her. Yesterday, after your letter, I told her that she must have joked about you and Agata with a Spaniard or a redhead, because the Spaniard talks nonsense to you both on me and relies on her. On this she swore to me that you and Agata had never really crossed her mind, adding that she knew your affection elsewhere, and that when a Spanish woman wanted to know something, it was her tactic to treat her stupid guesses as proven things and them on people with whom the one about whom he wants to know something is more familiar. There was no more talk about it. You can measure by how much she respects certain things. Time here is neither beautiful nor ugly. She was very weak on the first day; now very good on a horse (prefan) during the day she rides, cheerful, writes, paints, plays. Your Ch. I tore off the second quarter to give you more space to write. Write, please."
Dear friend. In the Impromptu that you published with the Gazette of July 9, an error was made in the pagination, which makes my composition incomprehensible. Far from the care shown by our friend Moscheles, this time I consider it my duty to you, the subscribers, to ask you to include the following erratum in the next issue: p. 3 - read p. 5 p. 5 - read p. 3 If you too busy or too lazy to write to me - then please answer me only with this erratum in the Gazette, which will mean to me that you, Mrs. Schlesinger and your children are all well. Completely devoted to Mr. Chopin.
" arrived at eleven o'clock and I am already at Mrs. Marliani's, from where we both write to you. You will see Ms. Solange on Thursday at midnight; there was no room on Friday or Saturday until next Wednesday, and that would be too late for everyone. I'd like to be back already, which I don't think you doubt, and I'm glad that fate has decreed that we're going on Thursday; so until Thursday, and tomorrow, if you will allow me, I will write again. Humble servant Ch... Bouli, I embrace you cordially. (I have to choose words that I know the spelling of.)"
 Miss Rozenga [rtówna] lives in Passier Sandier, rue Base du Rempart, at Mrs. Bachellery's boarding school, and Hoffmanowa, who is writing this, sends her most beautiful bow to the Lord, rejoicing at his arrival
"Dear Mr Leo. I come back from a few days trip, somewhat tiring, on the banks of the Creuse River, in a very picturesque area - and I find your letter. I was pleased to learn that the Moscheles family was with you - I thought I would benefit from it too - but when I read further that they are only staying until the 5th of this month, my joy turned to sadness. You know how much I love and admire Moscheles, and you will understand better than anyone how worried I am about not being able to go to Paris immediately, since I would have to leave tomorrow at the latest to arrive in time. – I hope that the sea has done both Mrs. Léo and your nice little family good, and that you had as beautiful a September as we did here. Mrs. Viardot, who was just for several weeks at Mrs. Sand's, only two or three times found time to sing; the sky was still so kind that you had to go for walks constantly. Fall is generally the most beautiful time of the year in Berry - I will be staying here for a few more weeks as well. – I am addressing my letter to Rue Louis le Grand, as I do not remember the exact number on Rue St. Honoré. I am sure it will reach the hands of the Lord, for the letter of the Lord reached me, although it was addressed fantastically. Would you like to pay my respects to your Lady, as well as to the Moscheles family. Completely devoted to you, Chopin. Please don't forget to say hello to Mr. and Mrs. Valentin."
"My life! I told you that I would ask you to send one letter to the family, the other to Leipzig, with the manuscripts. I have no one else to trust but you. Be kind, throw it on the bursa as you pass by. My manuscript is worth nothing, but it would be a lot of work for me to lose it. Here is not the best health of the Lady of the House. I ramble as much as I can, but I don't know when I'll see you. The weather is still here; it's nice for the kids to frolic and the project is late to come back, especially since the city costs a lot. You must have finished your hotel or almost. Not a day goes by that I don't think about you and everything that should give you happiness. I hope to find you healthy, cheerful and as happy as possible. A few days ago they were going out to see the shores of de la Creuse: the young man was drawing views. The walk with friends and neighbors was very successful, but on his return his health deteriorated and he was unable to work for several days. That's what he's worried about, so it's not fun. I hug you warmly, your old Ch. Kiss your hands respectfully."
"Dear Mr Leo. By your kind authorization, I am sending you my manuscripts for London, and I ask you to kindly forward them to F-my Wessel and Stapleton. Please, be kind enough to add their address to my letter, which I do not remember exactly (probably it was kept in your office) - and send it by post as soon as possible. I apologize a thousand times for the trouble I am burdening you with. - Here the leaves start to fall faster and faster, which speeds up my trip to Paris. It is possible that in about two weeks I will visit you on St. Honoré number... (can't remember again). What a pity that Moscheles is gone! Why does he stay so short, if he comes so rarely... - I learned from a poor article in the ""Gazette Musicale"", worthy of its author, about the success of Moscheles with Erard - and I was very sorry that I had not been there. It would have revitalized me a bit and pulled me out of the beaten and empty roads of modern music, which is usually so banal. I hope that all of you are healthy. Will you please pay my respects to Mrs. Léa and have me always sincerely devoted to him. F. Chopin. Please don't forget to give my regards to Mr. and Mrs. Valentin. ""Wouldn't it be necessary to give the address of the letter to Wessel in English?"" “I am sending it unsealed, and I ask you to do what you see fit."
Dear friend! I have a little 13-year-old niece who, in our opinion, is destined to take a prominent place among artists, and we are eager to pave the way for her career. For a long time her only ambition was to be a disciple of the Lord, but I did not want to introduce her to the Lord in any way before she was able to understand you. I suppose now it would no longer be unworthy of your acceptance, but will you be able to accept it? I am not asking if you will, I have full confidence in your friendship, but will you be able to? That's the whole point. I am asking you fervently, dear Chopin, to accept my niece, who is also the niece of Mrs. Eugenia Beer, as a student. The Lord will soon tell us in all sincerity whether we can place our hopes in her, and if so, the Lord will make us happy by guiding her by His guidance, and shaping her faculties by giving her lessons. Her mother, my sister-in-law, will give you this letter and bring her daughter. May it bring me a successful answer. Respect and friendship Ad. cremieux.
This is what Maurycy writes to you. We have received good news from you and we are glad that you are satisfied. Everything you do must be great and beautiful, if we do not write about what you do, it is not because we are not interested in it. Maurice sent you his mailbox yesterday evening. Please write, please write. See you tomorrow. Please think of your old ones. Ch. For Sol [greetings]. Maurycy is well and so am I.
"So you inspected the stables and you got tired of it. For God's sake, please save yourself before leaving and bring us beautiful weather from Nohant, because it's always raining here. Nevertheless, after waiting in vain until the third hour for the weather, I had a carriage fetched, went to Rothschild's and Stockhausen's, and feel no worse. Today is Sunday, I rest and don't go out, but because I want to, not out of necessity. Please believe that we are both well, that sickness stays away from me and that all I see ahead of me is happiness, that I have never hoped more than for the coming week, and that everything will be all right Lady... She tells us You also said that the skin came off your palate, for God's sake, don't take this medicine. We had a good dinner at Mrs. Marliani's. Then some went to the evening party, some drew, some went to bed. I slept in my bed, like you in your armchair, tired as if after a hard effort; I think the medicine I'm taking is too much for sleep - I'll ask Molin for another one. See you tomorrow; We will write to you every day until Wednesday. Don't stop thinking about your old, very old friends, who obviously don't think about anything but you. Maurice left. Four more days. Chopin."
"I, the undersigned, residing in Paris, rue St. Lazare 34, I confirm that I have sold to Breitkopf and Härtel in Leipzig the ownership of the following works of my composition, namely: Op. 12. Variations on Ludowik's theme "" 15. Three Nocturnes "" 16. Rondo "" 17. 4 Mazurkas "" 18. Grande Valse brillante "" 20. Scherzo "" 21. Second Concerto "" 22. Grand Polonaise "" 23. Ballade "" 24. 4 Mazurkas "" 25. 12 Etudes in two projections "" 26. Two Polonaises "" 27. Two Nocturnes "" 28. 24 Preludes "" 29. Impromptu "" 30. 4 Mazurkas "" 31. Scherzo "" 33. 4 Mazurkas "" 34. Three Waltzes No. 1–3 "" 35. Sonata „ 36. Second Impromptu „ 37. Two Nocturnes „ 38. Ballade „ 39. Third Scherzo „ 40. Two Polonaises „ 41. 4 Mazurkas „ 42. Waltz „ 46. Allegro de Concerto „ 47. Third Ballade „ 49. Fantasy „ 52. Fourth Ballad „ 53. Polonaise „ 54. Fourth Scherzo. I certify that I have assigned the title to the named company without any reservation or limitation for all times and for all countries except France and England and I certify receipt of the agreed fees, for which I have issued a separate receipt. F. Chopin."
Dear Mr Hartel. I am sending back your receipt signed by me - and since we are talking about business, I ask you whether you will be pleased if I send you, through Mr. Maho, my 2 Nocturnes and my 3 Mazurkas, counting 600 francs each. for each of these 2 opuses? Please give the answer to Mr. Maho, who will communicate it to me. I am very sorry that I had the pleasure of seeing you so rarely during your stay in Paris this year - I hope that I will make it up to you for your future stay. So see you soon. “I am asking you all to express my respects to you. Dedicated to Mr. Fr. Chopin.
 It's not the Duchess's ball that's the cause, but my shortness of breath, that tomorrow morning I won't be able to have the pleasure of hearing you. Maybe on Thursday I'll find time and write a word. All the best. Ch.
 If you like it today at a quarter to one, I will be able to listen to you. All the best. Chopin.
 beg you, come to me this morning before the island. Your.
"Be calm, my dear, about us and remember about yourself, because you, as before, are all our consolation now. Gratitude to your caregiver for her care for you and the heart shown to us! Her few words reassured Mama and us about your health. What is it when someone has a heart; without knowing people, he knows how to reach their hearts and pour comfort into their afflicted souls. You, my only one, thank her most tenderly for this, and do not succumb to just and due grief yourself. Mom stayed with us today; God bless you to enjoy it as long as possible; today we should turn all filial love to her, we should sweeten her moments dear to us. Mr. Bełza, who knew you at the Brandts' house and has been living with us for several years now, is going to Paris at the end of this month and will probably be there in July; I wish he could see you. Papa loved and respected him very much. He is also a true friend of our family; no one knows us better than him. We'd love to give you a hug. A man with a head and a heart! Also tell me where Nohant is. People ask me that and I don't know; and although I would like to find it on the card, I don't have such a detailed one. My mother is invited to various places in the countryside, and the Domusiowie Dziewanowski, whom you both knew as children, and who are our friends today. You won't believe, my dear, how much compassion this misfortune caused us! - Be healthy and calm, that's what we wish you from the heart. Write to us, my only one, always the truth about yourself, because we love you and always think about you. Isabella."
My dear. I am waiting for you dressed, ready for your call. Albert.
 I am waiting for you today, before you go on the usual road, between 12 and 12 and ?. If I am not back home yet, please wait for your grace. I hug you most sincerely. Ch.
 Postponed to Monday. I couldn't leave today. X-na Mar[celina] and Adamowa are there. Come, if you can, to my hudy [!] dinner. Ch.
 Dear friend. Come see me at 1 o'clock at No. 9. Miss Stirling is here and would like to speak to you about her lessons. My respects to Madame Franchomme.
Will not the gracious Lord, after my old acquaintance and recent neighbourhood, be so good as to let me come to him tomorrow at any time, and with my new daughter, Miss Marie Forbes - lessons, I know that I do not demand, but because Mother gave I want her with body and soul, I would like to know to what extent her musical ability is and who to take to her. – I am sorry for my importunity – if you could not in any way – just let me say a word – 65 rue Neuve des Mathurins, but I would be very sorry. Hoffman.
 I would like to say 2 words to you today. Please come after your club dinner, it will be right before mine. Ch.
 If it's definitely on Wednesday - that's good, but if it's not for sure - then you have to go and ask for it on Wednesday - it's tomorrow. I hug you cordially Ch.
My Life, if you can, stop by the Hotel Lambert, I would like to say a word to you, but I can't move. Chopin.
 You won't believe how sorry I was when I saw your card that I wasn't home. If you want to see me today, you can find me until 11 and from 1 to 5. I hug you cordially Ch.
 My dear Chopin. I write with my left hand to practice. But I write quite crookedly. When my right arm is paralyzed, I'll be very happy if I can at least sign my name. George Sand. [Repeated several times below:] Maurice Sand... Solange Sand... George Sand... Pistol... Frédéric Chopin...
"Dearest Fritz! Your wish that you have the minutest details of the last moments of our inestimable Father's life written to you is right and just; more to say, if I had the gift of eloquence, and thus was able to describe his whole life, I would do it for the common good, to teach people how to live and die, so that even in the grave they would not be forgotten and deserve universal respect and adoration handed down from generation to generation. Whoever would have an idea of the death of the just should witness the whole sequence of our Father's short illness and end: peace of mind not separated from peace of conscience; inner consolation and delight that he had produced children who knew how to love and respect their parents; the pleasant conviction that one did not live for oneself, but for the good of others; think that all adore him and honor his upright character. To live 75 years in the world amid the corruption and demoralization inherent in human nature and not have a single enemy; to remember that many families had lifted themselves out of poverty, they had given friends in need of support and salvation advice, the message of which could be gleaned from other letters; to be content with little, to desire neither riches nor blinding honors; to love home life, to love one's family with the heart of a friend, to live their happiness, to rejoice and boast that God allowed him to keep the fruit of so many years of hard work and efforts from his own children, in whom one can boldly see himself, his soul and heart, only he could as in the mirror reflected to watch. Such a man never dies, he lives among us, because his thoughts and feelings in every moment of our existence revive his memory anew. This image, although far from reality, of which it is only a faint shade, makes it easy for you to guess what our inestimable Father was in the course of his weakness; 75 years of age, tormented by long and arduous work, was our Father's whole and final illness. Therefore, in the time of weakness, which did not manifest itself in the sufferings of the body, but in the slowly disappearing forces, he did not complain about any sufferings, he was always calm, talking and even cheerful, which he did not need to hide. Surrounded by his family, he was happy and said: ""I thank the highest God that he allowed me to raise such good, virtuous and tender children"". He often mentioned you, and in the last days of his stay on earth, he instructed me to encourage you in his name to endure the blow that was to befall us all, with resignation and the thought that no one should resist the judgments of Heaven, that such the years he has reached should be regarded as the grace of the Most High. – I can only assure you that from the beginning to the last moment, day and night, we all tried to be ready for the slightest nod from dear Father. – The last night from Thursday to Friday, Izabela and I spent vigil with him; over the day, he sensed his end was near, tenderly pressed me to his heart, saying: ""Antosia, dear Antosia, do not leave me today."" You understand that this speech, full of superhuman kindness, terrified me and at the same time touched my heart; I did not leave him, nor did all my siblings, on whom, pouring my blessing, as well as on you, whom he remembered, often turning his gaze to your portraits and breasts, he gave his spirit to God. He never complained about any suffering or severe pain. Always endearing with his kindness and calm until the last moment, he thanked everyone with his own courtesy for the smallest service done to him; he fell asleep in the full sense of the word, and I wish that everyone could live like him and die like him. From this description you will see, my dear, to what extent our Father loved me and what confidence he placed in me; I am proud of it, and at the same time experiencing the greatest delight, that I was able to deserve his love and respect, that he counted me among his own children. I mention this circumstance so that I may at least partially acquire the right to your heart and be able to make remarks to you, sometimes drawn from the heart of our best Father, which have never been a secret to me. So I beseech You, Dearest Brother, in remembrance of the Father and love for the living mother and sisters, calm down your grief. Take comfort in the thought that our Father was adored, honored and loved by all; that he lives and will live in the soul and heart of all those who knew him, that your sadness and melancholy could undermine your health, which would again entail the sad sequence of sorrows and worries of your most beloved mother and sisters, which I am sure will you do not wish. Think about yourself, about your health, listen to the salutary advice, based on your mind and heart, your guardian angel, whom I adore, respect and revere only from the writings, and if I could ever see you, I would fall at her feet, I would douse them tears of gratitude for the tender and maternal care she extends over you. Your health and life is an inseparable part of ours; respect them if you wish to enjoy our happiness. Mom is with us; together, we will fit in 6 rooms on the first floor, which I deliberately ordered to be tidied up. Be completely calm about her, she is under the care of a caring daughter and mine, who I want to worthy, I will not say, replace you, because you are the only one in the whole world, but at least remind you of your feelings towards the best of mothers. You do assure me that you are calm; I want to believe it, but You will prove this promise to me by your actions, when you will not stop thinking about your health. I know that you loved Father, I know that you love Mother and sisters, and I even guess that you wish their husbands well. Therefore, if the love of all siblings is dear to you, you will remember about yourself; you will not worry, because our Father himself would have to be angry about it. Be healthy and happy; write often, because it is the only balm for afflicted souls. We live at Nowy Świat at No. 1255, and the Jędrzejewiczes at Podwale at No. 526. Our dear mother, having lost her old friend, turned to you with all her heart and soul; so take pity on her and console her with your health, do not worry lest you inadvertently cause the loss of this most precious treasure on earth. Remember that your life is not your exclusive property; it still belongs to her who gave it [!] to you, and to those who love you even more than themselves; remember that the health of your admirable family depends solely on your happiness. Write to us the honest truth, emerge from all moral suffering, you will ease your troubled heart a bit and you will be better. We cry sometimes looking at the dear souvenirs of our beloved Father, made in our garden by his hand. Every vine of the vine, the railings made and arranged by him last year, and so many other objects testify that a man of learning and love of work could deal with physical employment with benefit and pleasure. Our dearest Mother, despite so many sleepless nights she spent in the service of her friend, despite so many torments of the heart and painful feelings at the very thought of having to part with the one she loved and respected so much, only moral strength kept her apart; a strong soul and unlimited trust in God gave new strength to the body to endure the greatest misfortune in her life. For it is now, let them be by Providence, better than it ever was. The rest will be written by the sisters, and I just hug you warmly and please declare to the one who replaces you the place of your mother, my sincerest gratitude and deep respect. In order not to omit anything, I should also add that Bełza, our friend at home, who has lived in our tenement house for a long time, a very learned man with a kind heart, the one who shared our happiness and sadness, worked a few years ago on a project to establish pre-burial houses in Warsaw; having read the subject, he used to tell Father and us at different times, when he was still quite healthy, various cases of apparent deaths, in which our dear Papa helped him with anecdotes in a similar spirit. It is evident, therefore, that our Father's active imagination in the last moments of his life recalled these events, and since the Father was a thinking, foresight and mentally extremely active man, it is not surprising that he asked us to open his body after death, for fear lest succumbed to the sad fate of resurrection in the grave. When I persuaded him that his condition was not dangerous, that God would give, that we would have fun in the garden, that we would play picket, according to our custom, he smiled at me and said: “My Antosiu, so I suggest it just in case; and if I recover, I hope that this time my caution will be unnecessary. – Do not think then, dear Frycia, that sufferings drove him to this determination; it was his belief, which he told me about several years before his death. Do not imagine anything terrible, do not attribute this decision of the Father to any sufferings or torments, because you would hurt Him. A just man like Him, a man full of virtues and righteousness, a man who breathed the happiness of his fellow men and devoted his whole life to their good, was not afraid of death, did not suffer any torment, died with delight and with this sweet conviction that he would live in children, whose hearts he has formed after his own. He was completely calm, full of pleasant conviction that the unity of feelings, brotherly love, mutual care of all members of a small but basically kind family gave him the most solemn assurance of their happiness on earth; and since at the end of his life he only breathed our fate and success, he had not the slightest reason to be sad and tormented. Every day he repeated and reminded that it would be hard to find a happier father than him: “God will bless you,” he said to us. Always love each other, respect each other, take care of your health, take care of your mother."" – Believe, dear Fryciu, all that I have written about our adoring Father; no one from me had more trust and greater access to the secrets of His heart than I; therefore, I am revealing the honest truth to you, with the conviction that the assurances I have given you here will, at least in part, become words of comfort for you. Ant. Our beloved Kalasanty from Podwale came to Nowy Świat every other day to spend the night with his dearest Father. A worthy and inestimable husband. We owe it to his efforts and hardships that the funeral ceremony took place according to our wishes, not with the splendor and splendor of the world, but orderly and God-fearing. Our sister-in-law has a tender and kind heart, and I love him as a brother and friend. I hurry to the office, I hug and kiss you again. AND"
Please forgive me for asking you for a favor. Perhaps my sister Ludwika will arrive in Paris in 10, 15 or 20 days. Would you please leave this letter for my brother-in-law with the caretaker of No. 9, instructing her to keep the letter safe and deliver it to anyone who asks for it. I also entrust to you a letter to my mother. - Thank you in advance for all your kindness. Chopin.
" I, the undersigned, Fryderyk Chopin, residing in Paris rue St. Lazare, place d'Orléans, I certify that I have sold to Breitkopf and Härtel in Leipzig the ownership of the following works of my composition, namely: a) opus 55. Two Nocturnes for piano; b) opus 56. Three Mazurkas for piano. I declare that I have transferred the title to the above-mentioned company without any reservations or restrictions for all times and for all countries except France and England and confirm the receipt of the agreed fee, which I have separately signed. Fr. Chopin."
"My dearest Life! I'm already in Nohant. All I could think about on the way was your last conversation. Beloved, you are always there and may the Lord God improve your dormitory fate [1] . Your recent business interests the Lady of the House here as much as your somersault mortale [2] from those stairs. I am writing to you because I forgot to ask you for Fireworks. Would you not be able to obtain for my sister, through that butler of Philip, a piece of the window in the Tulleries? Sometimes it's easy for you, so if your mind is slower, help my good sister to see these stories. Write me a word about what's going on with your interests. You don't write much, but is it better? Pay my respects to Enghien, and if you see your sister, send her here. I hug you most sincerely. Your old Ch. [George Sand Postscript - Translation] So, my poor fat beast, did you bruise your ass and head and all sorts of other things? Do not repeat similar entertainments. I beg. I am asking God to quickly forget about this lousy holiday and not to be hit by stock market failures. You are a risk taker by all means. Fortunately, there is a God for good hearts and bad heads. My little Chopin is recovering, but he is worried about your bruised ass. Let us know soon that you will not engage in such a thing again, that you have not experienced the reverse side of the coin, and that you love us as we love you. Send me to the feet of your good angel. The children hug you and so do I, if you let it. George. [1] Dormitory fate (from French bourse - purse; stock exchange) - money matters. [2] Salto mortale (Latin) - literally deadly jump; here: fall."
Dearest. I am sending you one letter from Schlesinger and another to him. Read them. He'd like to delay the release, and I can't agree to that. If he persists in his decision, give me my manuscripts to Mr. Maho, let him see to it that Mr. Meissonnier takes them at the same price, 600 francs. I think he (Schlesinger) will etch them. They should be released on the 20th. But you know that now it's not enough to register the title. I'm sorry for bothering you. I love you and I address you as a brother. I kiss your children. Friendly greetings to your wife. Your sincerely devoted. F. Chopin. A thousand kindnesses from Mr. Sand.
"Dearest. I was in a hurry yesterday when I wrote to you that you should approach Meissonier through Maho in case Schlesinger should reject my compositions. I forgot that Henri Lemoine paid Schlesinger very dearly for my etudes; I would rather have my manuscripts etched by Lemoine than by Meissonnier. I have troubled you greatly, my dear, but I enclose a letter for Lemoine. Read it and get along with it. He has to release compositions or at least register titles for 20 bm. Ask him only 300 francs per piece, which will be 600 francs for two. Tell him he may not pay me until I return to Paris. Return these two pieces for 500 francs if you feel it is necessary. I'd rather give it to Meissonnier for 600 francs, as I wrote to you yesterday without much thought. It's a different matter if you've already negotiated with M. If not, don't go below 1,000 francs. For Maho, who is Härtel's correspondent (he pays me well), you can give up my price for Germany, since he knows I sell them so cheaply in Paris. I bother you a lot with my affairs. That's all in case Schlesinger sticks to his intention of publishing nothing this month. Demand 800 francs from Lemoine for both works if you think he'll give them. I don't give him a price to give you complete freedom. I don't have time anymore because the post office is leaving. I hug you, dear brother - write me a few words. Your devoted Chopin. Friendly greetings to you and a thousand kisses to the children."
Dear friend. That's all I have time to slip a letter from Schles[inger] under this page, which I hope will reassure you. Pay my respects to Mrs. Sand, whom I thank very much for the nice memory, and believe me that I am always your completely devoted friend August Franchomme.
 Dearest. I counted so much on your friendship that the speed with which you settled your business with Schlesinger did not surprise me at all. I thank you from the bottom of my heart and I look forward to the opportunity to repay you. I believe that you are all right - that Mrs. Franchomme and your dear children are well and that you love me as I love you. Your F. Chopin. Mrs. Sand kisses your baby and sends a hearty handshake.
Here I am entrusting you with another letter to my family. I've been allowed this boldness - so I'm not asking for forgiveness. At the same time, please accept my gratitude for the invaluable kindness you surrounded Ludwika in Paris. - We were going to write to you the other day, but our first days here were like our first days in Paris - we lost our heads with happiness - so I don't know if you will understand my French today. I hope you understand all my friendship for you. Chopin. [Position by George Sand] Baby, before I write, I kiss you tenderly. “I am at the most critical moment in my novel. I'll be done soon, and then I'll better tell you how much I love you. Sol is cordially connected, sincerely devoted to GS [Position by Ludwika Jędrzejewiczowa] Despite all our happiness, we often think of you, dear Miss de Rozi?res. My husband, with his usual modesty, keeps his composure, I don't know how long it will last. He is busy drawing, which shuts him up. You send a lot of cordiality and remind you of Mr. Midziński. I kiss you very heartily and commend myself to her memory. L.J
Our esteemed compatriot, Count Tarnowski, going to Paris, most earnestly wishes to meet in person a man of European fame, Fryderyk Chopin, whose name has become the pride of the nation. I am delighted to grasp the skill given to me, already once in the desire to satisfy the wishes of a true music lover, whom you will have the pleasure of meeting as the giver of this note, as well as to remember your kindness, which between us, despite temporary obstacles and distance, will always last will and should last. Carrying in my heart a feeling of full adoration for You, Dear Master, I profess to be Your true devotee. Karol Lipinski.
" came the other night; I always run with my sister and every morning it comes down to nothing. How to see you? – Today I lead them to Rachel; I'll be close to you, maybe I'll drop in at night - or tomorrow morning. - They're still here Monday, and Tuesday I'm going to Nohant - they're going home. Mrs. S. hugs you warmly. Your old Ch."
"Dear Miss de Rozi?res. So we dreamed that we saw Ludwika. May God grant that she returns to her family in good health. The lady was so kind that it is impossible to say more, and I have not yet thanked you enough for her good heart. I'm sorry Maurice isn't here yet. It seems to me that he will arrive today, as if to give me reason to regret that I did not wait for him. Anyway, I had the best of intentions. Remind him of Varennes and the Marquis. It is possible that he has a second key with him; would you please let us know when it arrives. If there is a letter for me from Mrs. Sand (which, by reason, is hard to believe), please keep it for me. Also, don't forget about this box. It must be tarred and covered with fat; the packers seem to know this. If Mr. Franck (who lives above me) does not send back the Encyclopaedia and l'Humanité tomorrow, you will remind him of that. Please write me a word. God will bless you. You love Ludwika. Please forgive me for bothering her with our affairs. Devoted Ch. Gaillard rode the same stagecoach."
" have only enough time to ask you to send this letter to Vienna, to post it if necessary (which is very possible), because in Austria it is not like everywhere else; to thank you for such a nice letter, to remind her inbox, pp. Franck and Duwy and fall at her feet. Soon you will have a second letter with more scribbling in it. Had my letter been delayed by a day, it might not have reached their hands in time. “Everyone is fine here. Maurice just wrote. Adieu Ch. \r\n"
"Thanks for the good news letter from my sister who, thank God, is taking the trip quite well. Thanks also for p. Duwe and Franck; for the latter I am enclosing a few words which I ask you to deliver to him without delay if he has not yet sent the books. Otherwise, please keep the letter. I am sending you l'Humanité by Mr. Leroux by stagecoach, which please attach to the rest of the books and send the box as soon as possible, for when you receive my letter it will be ten days since their departure. Please, ask Mr. Duwe to check the customs declaration - and if it would not be better to give instead of what is written, simply: scientific books, journals and dictionaries. Please be kind enough to write to me whether it will go via Gdańsk or Szczecin, and by what route it will arrive in Toruń. Wouldn't it be better to send it only via Hamburg? Does he have good relations in Gdańsk or Szczecin, because I would not like it to die on the way. Thank you for all your kindness. - Solange will write to you. P. Sand is a bit unhealthy today. I only add greetings to my letter. - It's raining. A moment ago there was a lesson on Beethoven's new Sonata. Ms Colleague Ch."
"My baby. I send you songs, something she heard one evening. – Solange, who told you to hug you, reminded me twice, she wrote you the words from memory, and I wrote the music. I hope you stayed safely and that you had news from me in Vienna and Krakow. I sent you my little song to Vienna, which I promised you, ""Beautiful boy, what do you want"", and to Krakow a few words to Mrs. Fr. Skarbkowa. If you haven't picked up either of them, which may be because the Austrian post offices are very slow, have the Krakow letter sent back to you, because I'd love for you to hand it over to P. Skarbek; Never mind the Viennese - I'll write you a song again. I addressed Mr le Prof. JK Jędrzejewicz, poste restante. - I'm talking about Krakow. ""You missed me today. As long as this trip doesn't strain your health. Write me a word. I've been a bit lazy for a few days. Maurice is not here yet, but he is to return tomorrow, the day after tomorrow. You remember that I foretold when I left here that I would return by post myself, and that all our postage would be to cover certain conventions. “Today, after the project lunch, go to Ars. – Aunt here is the Lady of the House with her ward; lives, as I wrote to you in Vienna, in your boarding house. Often, when I come in, I look for anything left of you, and all I see is the very place by the sofa, where we drank chocolate [!] - and those drawings that Kalasanty was copying. – There are more of you left in my room – on the table is your embroidering of that slipper, wrapped [!] in English tissue paper – and on the piano a small pencil, which was in your pocketbook and which serves me perfectly. ""I'm done because we're leaving."" - I hug you most cordially, hug Kalasanty - tell him that Hippolytus bows to him. Hug the kids too. Your old Ch. write."
"Dearest. I haven't written to you yet because I thought I'd see you this week in Paris. Since my departure from here has been delayed, I am sending you a word to Schlesinger, asking him to deliver to you the payment for my last manuscripts, that is, 600 francs (of which keep 100 for me). – I hope he will do it without difficulty, otherwise ask him (without hesitation) for a few words of the opposite answer, send them to me, and I will write immediately to M. Léo, asking him to give you the 500 francs before the end of the month. that you were kind enough to lend me. ""What more should I tell you?"" I often think of the last evening I spent with my dear sister. How happy she was to hear you! – She wrote to me from Strasbourg asking me to remind you and Madame Franchomme. I hope you are all well and that I find you healthy. - Write to me and love me as I love you. Your old Chopin. Thousands of greetings to you. I kiss your dear children. A thousand greetings from Mrs. Sand. I work a little. Ch. I am sending you a receipt for Schl[esinger] which you will deliver to him only in exchange for cash. ""Again, don't worry if he gives you trouble. - I am kissing you. Ch."
"How is your health? I'm already in Paris. I gave the parcel to Mrs. Joly. He was very nice. I saw M. de Rozi?res, who received me at breakfast. I saw Franchomme and my publisher. I visited Delacroix, who doesn't leave the house. For two and a half hours we talked about music, painting, and above all about you. I've booked myself in for Thursday; I will be with you on Friday. I go to the post office, then to Grzymała and to Léo. Tomorrow, Franchomme and I will be playing sonatas. Here is a leaf from your garden. Grzymała has just entered and says to you: good morning, and will add two words. I won't say anything else, except that I am healthy and you are the most steadfast of the steadfast. I will never forget any of your orders. I am going to Duchess Czart[oryska] with Grzym[ała]. May you give your beloved children a kiss for me. Chopin."
Dear friend. I forgot to ask the Lord for one favor yesterday - to write from myself to Mr. Brown, the shoemaker, asking him to come to me these days around 9 am (rue Notre-Dame-de-Lorette 54). Perhaps he would like to make shoes for me at your command. I wrote to him to no avail and decided to ask you for support before you left. It's sad that life goes by and we don't see each other. I love you sincerely, I venerate you greatly, and consider you one of those who bring glory to our unfortunate race. Devoted to the Lord with all my heart, Dear Friend Eug. Delacroix.
Dearest Chopin. The shoemaker's address is Rapp, rue Feydeau 19. Tell him what form of noses you would like to have. He usually does the rounded ones the English wear. Stay well, Dear Friend, accept expressions of tenderness and wishes from a man who loves you no less than admires you. Eug. Delacroix. Order winter boots from a cobbler like Arrowsmith makes for you. The sole is very thick and light.
"One more letter to Warsaw. I abuse your kindness. I'd better say it orally. My sister wrote to me in great haste and asks you to tell her how much she loves you and that she will write to you. He sends his son to high school. And you must be sending me to hell because I bore you with my correspondence. That does not prevent me from asking you, however, if you see Franchomme, to tell him to write to me if he has received the manuscript for Léo (that is, the letter). Please take care of yourself. Here it is not bad, but health is not extraordinary. Next month I shall have the honor of paying my respects to you in person; meanwhile, you will be willing to accept all the words that are put at the end of a letter when you have access to a correspondence manual. Ch. No one writes to you anymore. Everyone is hugging you and waiting for news."
 haven't sent you any news about us for a long time, because I thought I'd see you soon. - Since the projects have changed, I am writing a few more words before leaving for Paris, asking you to take care of a letter to my mother. I hope you're fully recovered now, and that you're not acting like Donna Sol, who's been a little unwell the last few days. He says he will write to you soon. Please, tell the doorman at No. 9 that I will be in Paris in a few days. Also, have Perricher make some plain muslin curtains for my drawing room, if the old ones are too worn. Would you be so kind to check it out? Please accept my thanks in advance. Goodbye soon, I hope. Ch. My sister sends you thousands of tenderness in her letters. Have fun with Bach for me.
"Ludwice. My darling dear. You're together. I have received both your letters from Vienna and Krakow. Müller wrote to me that she was happy to meet you. Kind, isn't it? And Shashkova too. It is a pity that Dillerowa and Dessauer were not there. Müller, if she goes to Paris now, she will wait for me for some time; I'll probably stay here for a few more weeks. The leaves have not fallen completely, but have turned yellow, and the weather has been a week, which the Lady of the House uses for various plantations and the arrangement of the courtyard where, you remember, they danced. There will be a large lawn and flower beds. Also the project is from the room where the billiards, opposite the door from the dining room, make a door giving to the cheese (conservatory, as they say in our country), which they are going to add. Your Krakow letter came very timely. Scipio entertained me; but I did not find in it whether you received a few words for Mrs. Skarbek in my Krakow letter. Don't forget to write me about it. Your children have probably recovered as well. Write to me about doctor Domuś, also about Titus's hand. Sol is a little weak today, she's sitting in my room and she's telling you to bow very warmly. Her brother (kindness is not in his nature, so don't be surprised if he didn't make me say anything for your husband for that cigar machine) is going to stay with his father next month for a couple of weeks, and taking his uncle so he doesn't get bored. – The manuscript I brought, not yet printed, and there may be a lawsuit. If it comes to that, it will be to the greater advantage here, and always a temporary inconvenience. You remember how, when going for a walk through Vic (on the road to Châteauroux), sometimes the Lady of the House would stop and come in to visit a sick woman. It was impossible to save her and a few days ago in the cemetery, here by the garden, she was buried with great tears from her daughters. The one Sol went to didn't survive either. Do you remember that I once left my carriage in the square by the column in Paris and went to the Exchequer on business to a very old friend here? He came to me the next day. He was a respectable and oldest friend of the Lady of the House's father and mother. He was at her birthday, he buried her mother and truly belonged to the family. Well, on his way back from lunch to a deputy, his friend, he fell down the stairs and died a few hours later. It was a big blow here because they loved him immensely. In a word, since seeing you more sadness than joy. De Rozi?res writes about you with tendresses in every letter [1]; today my letter goes to her hands and I will say many compliments to her from you, because she is worth it. Wasn't she helpful? Tell Nowakowski that I love him the old way. I don't know his quintet yet, but I had it sent to me. Let me write a word sometime. The kind-hearted Franchomme wrote to me and with a very loving heart about you - he and his wife. As I am thinking of being in Paris with Jan a few days before the Lady of the House, don't worry about any bolsters or pillows or anything like that. Everything in the house will have to be cleaned again, decorated as usual for the winter. Write me your house number. Hug children and husband. Your father. The lady of the house hugs you, you know how they love you because they wrote to you. The bear up went here. [1] Tendresses - tenderness."
"My dear Chopin! In this letter, I would like to ask you for a certain courtesy. Would you be kind enough, as an old friend of mine, to write a few bars of music, mark at the bottom that you wrote them for my wife (Cecylia MB) and send them to me? When we last met in Frankfurt, I was engaged at the time; since then, whenever I want to give my wife great pleasure, I have to play her some of your music; he has a special fondness for everything the Lord composes. So this is a new reason for me (although I've had enough of them since I met you) to always be au courant of what you write, and to be concerned with you and your works much more than perhaps even you are concerned with them yourself. ; for this reason too, I trust that the Lord will be willing to grant me the grace I am asking for, and forgive me that by doing so I increase the number of intrusives who do not give you rest. Always very devoted to you, Felix Mendelssohn-Bartholdy."
"As you have wished me to give you advance notice of my arrival, I hasten to inform you that I shall have the pleasure of welcoming you to Paris on Sunday (at 12?, I believe). The stagecoach in which I shall come is from Bourges, Laffite et Comp., St. Honoré. I don't know exactly what time these vehicles arrive, but always during the day anyway; would you be so kind as to make my room burn and ask Mr. Durand to make an exception for me on Sunday and come visit me after 1 hour. Thank you in advance for everything and this time I say goodbye. Goodbye, bows and greetings. Ch. Everyone is doing well here and the weather is nice."
"Monday or Tuesday evening I will thank you in person for all your kindness. The letter from Valenciennes is indeed from one of my countrymen. In return, I am sending you a letter from Ludwika, and I will postpone my gratitude until my arrival; until Monday or Tuesday. Ch. Everyone is healthy here. They'll be leaving shortly after me. They send a lot of affection."
 Dear friend. My Sonata and variants are at your disposal. I would like twelve hundred francs for both works. I would have gone to the Lord, but I feel bad. Devoted to Mr. Chopin. My respect for you.
"How are you? I have just received a lovely letter from Mrs. It's snowing so much here that I'm relieved to think you're not on your way, and reproach myself for perhaps suggesting a postal journey to you in such weather. The mud of Sologne must be hard to cross now, for it has been snowing since yesterday morning. Your decision to wait a few days seems very reasonable to me, and I will have more time to have your apartment heated. The most important thing is that the Lady should not go on the road in such weather, terrible torment would await her. Jan has placed your flowers in the kitchen. Your whole garden is covered with snow, it looks like it's made of sugar, it resembles a swan, ermine, cheese with cream, Solange's hands and Maurice's teeth. I brought the fitters because I was afraid to get hot without them yesterday. The lady's dress is made of black levantine - the best quality. I chose it myself, according to the Lady's instructions. The seamstress took it along with all your instructions. She found the material very beautiful, modest, but in good taste. I think you will be pleased with it. The seamstress seemed very intelligent to me. The material has been chosen from ten others, costs nine francs a meter, so it is of the best quality, and will therefore, I believe, be excellent; a seamstress who wants to do her job well has anticipated everything. There are many letters here for you. I am sending one which I believe is from Garcia's mother. There is one from Cologne, another from Prussia, addressed to Mrs. Dudevant, née Francueil, I would send them today if they weren't so big. If you wish, I will forward them. There are plenty of magazines (""L'Atelier"", ""Le Bien Public"", ""Le Diable""), several books, several visiting cards, among them from Mr. Martins. Yesterday I had dinner at Franchomme's, because of the bad weather I left only at four o'clock, in the evening I visited Mr. Marliani. I will dine with her today with Leroux, as she told me, if his brother's court case - due today - ends early. I found both Marlianis in good health, with only a runny nose. I did not see either Grzymała or Pleyel because it was Sunday. I'm thinking of visiting them today if the snow stops falling a bit. Please be respectful, don't bother packing too much. I'll write again tomorrow, if you'll let me. Mrs. getting older - very, extraordinary, unbelievable old Ch. What else? Children's greetings. Franchomme spent the whole morning with me. He's very good to me. I'm going to your feet. I have just received a letter from Delatouche, I believe, so I am enclosing it."
"At this moment I have received your lovely letter from which I can see how worried you are by this delay. But for the sake of your friends, please be patient, for we would indeed be distraught to know that you, not quite well, set out on your journey in such weather. I would like you to get a place [in the stagecoach] as late as possible, perhaps it will be less cold; here the weather is incredible, everyone thinks that winter started too abruptly. All - means Messrs. Durand and Franchomme, whom I saw this morning and at whose place I dined yesterday by the fire, in my thick frock coat and next to his fat son. It was pink, fresh, warm, and bare-legged. I was yellow, withered, cold and had three layers of flannel under my pants. I promised him chocolate from you. Currently, Lady and chocolate are synonyms for him. I'm sure your hair, the blackness of which he spoke of so much, is now the color of chocolate in his memory. He's funny, fat, I like him very much. “I went to bed at half past eleven. But I didn't sleep as soundly as I did the night before after the train journey. I am very sorry that you have finished planting the trees; I wish you had something to do on Saturdays and in the open air, because despite the cold and slippery weather the weather is beautiful. The sky is clear and it's only clouding up to drop some snow. I wrote to Grim. He also wrote to me, but we haven't seen each other yet. I've been to see him, but he's elusive. I will go out, as always, to drop this letter at the boarding school, and before I go to Mademoiselle de Rozi?res, who is waiting for me with dinner, I will stop by to see Madame Marliani, whom I did not see yesterday or the day before; I haven't been to Madame Doribeaux's either, because I don't have the right clothes, so I don't make unnecessary visits. The lessons haven't really started yet. Primo, I only received one piano. Secundo, few people know that I have returned, and only today I had a few visits from interested people. Slowly and it will come, I'm not worried about it. On the other hand, I am disturbed by the thought that you sometimes get impatient, and so I prostrate myself at your feet, asking you to arm yourself with a little leniency towards coachmen who do not bring you answers from Châteauroux, and other similar matters. See you tomorrow. I am sending you a letter that will wake you up even more. I imagine the Lady in the morning, in a bathrobe, surrounded by her dear children, whom I would like to give a warm hug from me - and I fall at the Lady's feet. As for spelling mistakes, I'm too lazy to look at Boiste. Mrs. Old as a Mummy Ch. Jan is cleaning the living room at the moment. He is very busy with mirrors and devotes a lot of time to them."
"Dear and beloved Mr. Fryderyk! We've known each other for a long time, and apparently this is the first time I'm writing to you. The same encourages me and assures me that you will listen with indulgence. In place of my absent mutual friend Stefan, and feeling that I am doing a good deed, I dare recommend Miss Zofia Rozengartówna to you. Miss Zofia, whom you honored last year with your lessons, seems to me worthy by all means and still of your consideration. After all, it was she who, in her artistic ecstasy, set off into the wide world only to hear you, master, and be reborn to life! Young, smart, not without some skill, and at the same time full of skill and enthusiasm for art, God pity me if she wasted her time on the Parisian pavement and thus failed the hopes and expectations of her poor family. I have no doubts, dear Fryderyk, we all who love and adore you for a long time, that with understanding and the heart of a half-countryman-master you will enter Miss Zofia's orphan situation; that you would like to be her guide, advisor, guardian of taste in the difficult profession she has chosen. Above all, rebuke in the student her tendency to be discouraged at the slightest thing, to drop her hands. This inclination is common among poetic souls, and perhaps we have not all fallen into it in this cold real world, but it is perhaps most fatal to a young talent. Forgive me now for my unexpected importunity, and believe that I always adore and love You in the old way. Bohdan Zaleski. I had a fresh letter from Witwicki. He decided to winter in Freiwaldau. Priesnitz promises him a cure, but so far, apart from a hundred painful ulcers in addition to the old disease, he has felt no improvement in his health. However, he had a lot of comfort from the arrival of his brother, sister and Mrs. Lewocka, and now he rejoices in Priesnitz's hopes. I miss Stefan, I miss it also because through him I sometimes had an introduction to my beloved Fryderyk. To this day, in my solitary reverie here, I am sometimes reminded of some sleepy sound, loose, from a million of those with which you gave us in the past, our sorcerer! If I move to Paris, some day on Sunday morning I will attack you like a Cossack, trusting in old intimacy and comradeship. Et io sono pittore [1]. I deeply regret not having seen your esteemed sister. Once upon a time, in the year of the revolution, late Michał Skarbek had deposited a box with papers for safekeeping at your parents' house. This box and papers are my own, and I would like to know when and what happened to them. I mean mainly a few historical manuscripts and letters from friends of my youth. Greetings and hugs BZ [1] Et io sono pittore (Italian) – and I am a painter; words attributed to the Italian painter Correggio, which he is said to have uttered at the sight of Raphael's painting St. Cecilia."
Dear Mr Chopin. I am writing a few words from the village where I rested for two days to tell the Lord that I am returning on Saturday. I am very happy that Mrs. Sand will want to come to hear my piece, I will send you the box you wish. Devoted to Mr. E. Legouvé.
 If you're lazy, that's not good, and you'll get a scolding for it today - but if you'll let me, it won't be until 1:30 instead of 1 and at number 5. I don't know if I'll be able to leave the house by this slide. They are still sleeping here, otherwise you would be told to send a thousand kindnesses. Goodbye soon Ch. \r\n
 My Anthony. Many of those to whom I gave your tickets, and on whom I thought I could count, excused me with Chantilly fares, so don't be surprised that I have only placed one for you, and I am ashamed to send it back. Goodbye. t. a v. F. Chopin.
"Have they come? ""Do I have to wait today?"" - Give me an answer. I hug you cordially. I'm home until 11? and then from 2am until lunch."
 Please, darling, step in before the island today. – I hug you warmly.
 I send you a good day - this is a reassuring complement to yesterday's explications. I hug you cordially. Ch.
 Please, write me back the word through my messenger, how did he receive this note. - It was written yesterday. – The thing is for today, Wednesday, around 5 o'clock. I hug you cordially. Ch.
" My life, please give me this paper. ""Things are starting to settle down."" I hug you cordially. Ch."
Mickiewicz's drama in the hands of P. François. Mrs. Sand had long since left La Revue Ind., so she told me to wait for the return of this Mrs. François - in order to have a firm answer. I am sending back the lovely Soplica - I regret that I am away and that time will not allow me to go to Via Villedo to shake the hand of the translator. I regret that we did not see each other - I would have introduced you to Mrs. Sand and spared the correspondence. t.? v.Ch.
 Dear Chopin. They say small gifts keep friendship alive. I hope that you will listen with an understanding ear to the babbling of my daughters, and that they will prove to you that my thoughts accompany you even from afar. Addio, carino Fr. Kalkbrenner.
" will make you sad, dear Chopin, because I want to ask you something, and in this case it will cost you both consent and refusal. However, I succumb to desire and ask if you would like to play with me the adagio and finale of Beethoven's Symphony in A major at Erard's on Saturday evening, March 1? This is the 8-hand system we played 5 or 6 years ago at Papa's, this year I would suggest entrusting the other two games to Pixis and Zimmermann if you agree. If you do not agree, I do not even want you to explain the next time I visit you, you will only write ""yes"" or ""no"" at my address on a piece of paper. Now and always the same C.-V. alkane."
Dear Chopin. Many thanks for your kind memory. I've been told about it but haven't seen it yet. Looking through it, I can see that it is a great article. Give everyone around you a hug from me. Remember yourself! I'm going to Mrs. Sand with a request that she would like to express my gratitude to Karol Blanc, who is always so kind to me. See you soon with the Lord who deserves the altars and the palace [1], which I wish you and myself. A thousand cordiality, Dear Friend Eug. Delacroix. [1] In the original word play: autel - altar, hôtel - palace.
 am sorry for the late thank you and scolding for the beautiful and unnecessary flowers. I wanted to be at your place with thanks and scolding, but the cold held me back. I look forward to warmer days for my lessons to begin - and I hope to have the pleasure of hearing from you soon. F. Chopin. I am attaching 2 Gutman concert tickets. I don't know the program. \r\n [1] Original wordplay: autel - altar, hôtel - palace.
"My dearest Life. “I missed you so much this summer. With you I could cry a lot. – I often thought to write to Graeffenberg, but it ended on my mind – it turned into an impossibility, as soon as I took the pen in my hand – and now even more trouble than laziness cause that the letter of Mrs. Sand comes out a week later. – What can I tell you – that tomorrow, on Monday, the Great Sacrifice at the X-th Part. - That Mick. no course this year. That many of his followers are abandoning him. “That they say they wrote an apology to the Serene. – But what is sad is that 2 of them (one of them, apparently, Pilichowski) made a deed before a notary, as they give themselves into subjection as a thing, as slaves to Towiański – nb. They don't apply to your children, they apply to you for life. Can you be more crazy! – Mike. it is not, as before, with Tow[iański]. – The latter claims that they overdid it - that they went too far. – In a word, disagreement – so probably a sad end soon. “Besides that, everything goes as it was. And tonight I wish you could be with us and Delacroix at the Conservatory to hear Haydn's Creation. – The second is the concert we are attending this year – the previous one was our first with Mozart's Requiem [!]. – Today Grotkowski will come to me to sing You and some new things he doesn't know (old ones for you). – My beloved Ludwiczysko was looking for you around Vienna on his way back to Poland. ""They're always asking about you."" “My mother got through the winter pretty well. Tired and old. Perhaps we'll see each other again. I do not need to remind you of her soul - you know what kindness - and you can think how much good her letters have done me. – I saw Zaleski once, he was so worthy that he visited me. ""I'd like to see him more often."" “He looked pretty good. – Grzym[ała] younger than ever, dancing like a 20-year-old. It's cold as never here, today is the first day that there is no snow in the garden. Spring forgets about us. And you be well. May this year be blessed for you. Love me as I love you, although I am not worth as much as you. Your old Ch."
I'm leaving in 15 or 20 days. I'll be back in September or October. — Thank you for your gracious memory — and I remain always devoted to Chopin. A thousand bows to my aunt.
"Dear friend. Thank you for telling me about yourself and I assure you of my gratitude for his kind memory. I also think about you very often, especially whenever I think about beautiful music; the Lord alone will judge whether I have the opportunity, since Madame Viardot is here. You are telling me about Mr. Stern. I could send him soon a notebook with 3 Mazurkas or 2 Nocturnes. However, I must warn Mr. Härtel, who is always extremely kind to me; would not the price of six hundred francs for the ownership of Germany, and of all countries except France and England, seem excessive to Mr. Stern? How are you enduring the heat? “I am perfectly fine, and the countryside is so beautiful that I would feel very sorry for you being confined in the city, if it were not Paris. Please kindly convey my respects to my wife and believe in my sincere devotion to F. Chopin. Please don't forget to say hello to Mr. and Mrs. Valentin. Mrs. Sand tells you to express a lot of courtesy."
"My life. I know from Leon's letter, which, when writing to my editor in Berlin, mentioned you that you are healthy; and I see that you are always the same, loved even by those who have only recently known you. You are probably still thinking about the Rhine - if not in business up to your neck - nevertheless write us a word about yourself. Is it real - and when to expect you here? “And the countryside is beautiful now, not as it was a few weeks ago. “There have been great storms and downpours here. Rivers, even small streams, overflowed remarkably. – The oldest people do not remember such a flood. It destroyed the mills - it tore down the bridges. Viardot, who had come here a few weeks ago to fetch his wife, returned to Paris himself for danger, and only a few days ago Susanna drove him away from here. I did not write through them, but I asked Zuzanna to visit you to find out how you are doing. “Find out there, I pray you, some holiday for yourself—or, if you can, some business at Château[roux]. You will do perfectly - you will make, among others, your old, always attached Ch. To the Duchy, my most cordial respect. Health is good enough for everyone here. The lady of the house is writing a new romance."
"My Dearest. We've been here for over a month now. Mrs. Viardot came with us and stayed for 3 weeks. We were all perfectly healthy - in the countryside, however, there was fever in the winter. Franciszka's husband (maybe he remembers Ludwik) was ill almost all winter and now he is on his feet. - The weather is good - but when we came here, there were big storms. Indre flooded so much that in Montgioray Châtiron (brother of P. Dom) had a flooded garden and water in the house. – Viardot, who came to fetch his wife, could not bring her back because the roads to Châteauroux were flooded; and there, where we often went for a walk, from where there was a beautiful view, and it was impossible to get there. It was short-lived; there was a lot of damage to the meadows, but they had already forgotten. – I am not made for the country, but I enjoy the fresh air. – I don't play much, because my piano is out of tune, I write even less – that's why you haven't heard anything from me for so long. ""I think you're all in the village."" That Bartolosko Antolosko doesn't even remember his illness. That Ludwik Marżolenowski listens to advice – that he does not get tired. ""Tell her that the manuscript of the romance she heard here was autographed for her - that I saw Gutman [ann] just before leaving and told him to give you all a hug - and I liked him far more when he was away."" – Honest indeed. - Dear Izabeliska, let her have some fun there after her anxiety about her husband's health - and let him kill Kalasanty, because he is the strongest, he can endure such commission. – I feel strange this year; I often look in the next room in the morning, but no one is there. Sometimes an acquaintance will take the place, which will come for a few days. - So I don't drink chocolate [!] in the morning - and I placed the piano differently - next to the wall, where there was a sofa with a table, where Ludwika often embroidered my slippers, and the Lady of the House was working on something else. In the center is the desk where I write, to the left are some of my music papers - Mr. Thiers and poetry (in which a mustache); to the right Cherubim; in front of me that repeater you sent me in your screen (4th hour). Roses and nails, feathers and a piece of wax from Kalasanty. - I always have one foot with you - the other foot in the next room - where the Lady of the House works - and not at home at the moment - but, as usual, in some strange space. – These are probably those espaces imaginaires [1] – but I am not ashamed of it; after all, it was our proverb that ""by imagination he went to the coronation"", and I was a real blind Mazur. - So, not seeing far, I wrote new 3 Mazurkas - which will probably come out in Berlin - because one of my acquaintance, a kind boy, a learned musician, Stern, whose father is setting up a musical composition, asks me for them. – I also received an invitation from the committee that erects a monument to Beethoven (in Bonn on the Rhine) to go there for the inauguration. You can judge whether I will go - but if you were somewhere, I would and maybe move. But that's for next year. ""Because I don't know what he wrote to you, that P-sse Obreskow, who is passing by, is to be there this autumn, who is very fond of music and very kind to me, P-sse Obreskow, who is to bring Mameczka back to me in her carriage - and for her next spring it will be necessary for your daughters, sons-in-law and grandchildren to come. Indeed, this lady is very dear to me and with the greatest sincerity; besides, I had to write to you before about her kindness to me - but I will admit to you that I was amused by her lovely projects. If you see it, however, be for her also with a big heart - because I have always had many proofs of her goodness - and I love her very much. He likes music extremely. Her daughter Xna S[o]utzo, my pupil. – In a word, she is a very worthy Lady (although perhaps a little too lively on the surface). Viardowa also told me when she was passing through your city that she would visit you. She sang me a Spanish song of her composition - which she composed in Vienna last year; she promised to sing it to you. I like it very much - and I doubt that anything more beautiful of this kind can be heard or thought. This singing will connect you with me - I have always listened to it with great rapture. My Sonata and Berceuza are out. – Speaking of Berceuza, what comes to my mind is the kind of person Ludwika would like; however difficult these things are, they are not unlike, and I have often found out that there may be something. - What can I say about Paris? Before my departure, Hoffman's wife was very ill – they were afraid for her. I hope it's better, because Albert hasn't written me anything about it. He only wrote to me, what the newspapers wrote without mentioning names, about Victor Hugo, to whom a similar case had happened two weeks ago. Mr. Billard (peintre d'histoire [2], not much called), ugly himself, had a pretty wife whom Mr. Hugo seduced. Mr. Billard married his wife to the poet, so that Hugo had to show his medal to the Peer of France to the one who wanted to arrest him, so that he would immediately leave him alone. Mr. Billard wanted to start the trial with his wife - but ended up with a quiet separation. Hugo suddenly went on a trip for a few months. Mrs. Hugo (being splendid) took Mrs. Billard under her protection; and Juliette (an actress from the Porte St. Martin theater famous more than 10 years ago - whom Hugo has been supporting for a long time despite Mrs. Hugo and her children and poetry about the morality of the family), this Julietta went with him. – Parisian tongues content to have something to talk about; because also a funny story; add to this that Hugo, in the fifth cross and always very serious and superior to the world, pretends at every opportunity. – Donizetti has come to Paris, where he is to spend the summer and write a new opera. Donizetti, what Lucia wrote, Don Pasquale, La Favorita, etc. - Lamartine and his wife are here in Néris - the nearest waters are half a day's journey from here - where Méry was, who is now probably still with Pri[e]snitz - from whom long time news I did not have. Here in Châteauroux, great preparations for the ball of the 10th Nemours, who and his wife are passing through on their way to Bordeaux. Les sauvages indiens (Joways) have already left Le Versailles from Le Havre. The wife of one of them, whose name was Shinta-yi-ga, petit loup [3], and she Oke-wi-mi in Indian, and in French l'ours femelle qui marche sur le dos d'une autres [4] . she died (poor creature) du mal du pays [5] – they erect a monument to her at the Montmartre cemetery (where Jasio is buried). Just before she died, they baptized her and the funeral took place in Magdalena, in her parish; the monument is to be special, composed by M. Préault, a rather famous sculptor, and M. Lassus the architect. The monument is to be made of stone, around which a bronze flower winds up to the top, where it is torn off un fantôme [6] (supposedly le mal du pays), with bronze bas-reliefs [7] with gilded views of their montagnes rocheuses [8] shores of Missouri, etc., their life there and the poems of Mr. Antony Deschamps. I hope to write you news. Tell Bartek that the electric-magnetic telegraph between Baltimore and Washington is producing an extraordinary result. Often orders given from Baltimor at 1 p.m. are carried out, and goods and packages ready for departure at 1 p.m. 3rd from Washington - and small packets requested at 4? - arrive by convoi de 5h. [9] at 7? o'clock from Washington to Baltimore. 75 English miles - 25 French miles, I hope it's soon!! It's been a year since we saw each other with the Jędrzejewicz family, so it went down like an electric telegraph wire! If my letter doesn't hold up, it's because I write a cliche every day. – Sol interrupted me yesterday to play 4 hands with her. Today, to see how they cut down a tree, one of those who lived near the pavilion where Chaigne lived - who in the garden near the road - where the Jędrzejewicz family got off. This tree froze, so it had to be felled. “I have also received letters from Paris from Franchomm, from Mademoiselle de Rozi?res, who looks after my apartment. - Franchomme writes to me that Habeneck is going to Bonn for this inauguration - that Liszt wrote a cantata that will be sung under Liszt's direction - Spohr is conducting a great concert, which they will give in the evening. 3 days of music will be. – Also, speaking of monuments, Lessueur (musician) will also be erected in his birthplace, the city of Abbeville. Lessueur was Napoleon's Kapellmeister (membre de l'Institut [10]), a professor at the Conservatory. – Mr. Elsner knew him well, he gave me a letter to him when I was going to Paris. He was very enlightened and dignified; he died about 10 years ago before Paër and Cherubini - he wasn't very old. Speaking of monuments, the statue on horseback of the 10th of Orleans (who killed himself jumping out of the carriage) will be finished in a few days. It is placed on the square of the Louvre made of Algerian bronze - so are the bas-reliefs. The work of Marochetta - one of the most outstanding local sculptors. Marochetti, although his surname is Italian, is French and with a great extraordinary talent - all the more important works similar to him were entrusted to him. – Statue turned to Tullery. One of the bas-relief shows the capture of Anvers – and the other some Algerian episode. – Speaking of statues: near the government marble warehouse, near Champ-de-Mars, where they dumped marble rubble from various monuments (en dernier lieu [11] from Magdalena), great rains washed some of the rubble away, one of the overseers noticed the arm of a statue among them which rose above the other stones, as if to protest against its fate. - They finished what the water started - they removed the crushing rubble and found a Greek statue of marble, an antique of very fine workmanship, displaying Hercules, arr?tant la ch?vre d'Amalthée [12] - the goat is gone, only horns - a very interesting suit [13] - because only known from a few small pierres gravées [14] . – After the decision of the commission composed of Messrs. Letronne, Le Bas (the one who put the obelisk on its feet), etc., etc., they placed this statue right next to the Palais des Beaux-Arts – (where I left Jędrzejewiczism last year, and when I returned I found them in the hall, where is Delaroch's half-circle fresco showing all the famous painters of all ages - do they remember?). - This is the fourth time I sit down, and this time I expect to finish my letter; the weather has had time to change since the beginning of that side and it is raining today. – Expect the weather to be good in Paris for this month's festivities; this year, unlike the previous Jędrzejewiczism, it is to be illuminated. On the Seine this summer, a new concept was invented by speculators of human humor. There are a few very decorated ships and Venetian-style gondolas that walk around in the evening - this novelty appeals to the people of the boulevard, and apparently (I haven't seen it yet) a very large audience is let into the water. Well, this year the Champs-Élysées will be less illuminated, and instead all the splendor of the lanterns is to be on the quai [15] - as well as fireworks - water games, lots of racing boats, etc., etc. There will be no shortage of concepts and every precaution so that the least was. - Least of all, because it's impossible for some people not to drown, as they suffocate from curiosity on land. “Besides, the Calasanths must remember how crowded it is on days like this; but such stupid people that the bigger the crowd, the better the fun. - Big storm outside - and in the kitchen too. You can see it outside, but I wouldn't have known what was going on in the kitchen if Suzanna hadn't come to complain about John, who made all sorts of fights in French for her having taken a knife from the table. The Jędrzejewicz family know his French, so they can guess how beautifully he spoke; e.g. laide comme cochon – bouche comme derri?re [16] or even prettier. I don't know if they remember that if you ask him if there is, for example, a tree, he replies: il est sorti, is Suzanna at home? answers: il n'y a pas [17] . However, they often quarrel [!], and since the maid PS is very shapely, agile and necessary - so perhaps I will have to dismiss mine for the sake of peace - which I hate, because changing figures was of no use. Unfortunately, children do not like it here either, because it is decent and does its job regularly. - It's time for dinner. I would write more, but I want to send this letter today. “He is going to Miss de Rozi?res, who will take him to the post office herself. I write to her that if it is for me from you, send it to me. I don't care, because I know that this is the moment when some people go to the left, others to the right - and if not, then in various projects. - However, I am asking you to persuade your mother to go somewhere in the country - and Bartek to rest properly. The Lord God will surely keep all children in good health. - Let Kalasanty not give them lessons, like Maurycy here, who says various words, like wziwzina, siuzam, etc. Let Izabela, as the most brave, make sure that dear Ludwiczysko does not get tired too much. Me and Izabela are blond, we care a lot about brown hair. Hug your friends. Starting with Neighbors - and ending with the outskirts, if you are still in the city. - Mr. Fryd[eryk Skarbek] - Elsner, Nowak, Bełza, Tytus - and all the women. Mrs. Kozubowska had a very good dream yesterday. I often think about Mrs. Lutyńska, because they told me a lot of good things about her last year. My dearest mother, I hug you and all of you most cordially. Ch. If you see Domusia or Panna Ludwina or Mr. and Mrs. Juliuszostwo, remind me. - The lady of the house is working. – I do not interrupt her to write a word to Ludwika – but I know in advance that she greets her cordially. – Well, at this moment she has finished writing hers and sends a few words to Ludwika. Adieu, my beloved ones. Ludwika's name day for next month. [ By the way ] A story about Hugot for Kalasanty. One of those ladies who, speaking of horse courses, wanted to see six petites chaises (steeple-cheasse - let Bartek pronounce it in English), meaning what they call here une course au clocher - I don't know if we have a word for it; it's a straight course to the finish line over ditches, fences, and all that kind of obstacles. Well, one of such ladies, speaking of someone who was in a similar case to Hugo, said: qu'il a été trouvé flagrant dans le lit (en flagrant délit). If he knew the story, let him forgive the good intentions and receive the lady who wanted to know, ce que c'est que ce tabac du p?re Gol?ze (Stabat de Pergol?se). ""But it's even older!"" The newer lady who rented an apartment only asked the proprieter: de lui faire peintre le nombril (instead of lambris), because it was dirty. ""En tout cas let him remember that Godfroi de Bouillon is ainsi nommé parce qu'il a été le capitaine le plus consommé de son temps."" [18] \r\n [1] Espaces imaginaires - imaginary worlds. [2] Peintre d'histoire – historical painter. [3] Petit loup – a little wolf, a wolf. [4] L'ours femelle... autres – a female bear walking on the back of another bear. [5] Du mal du pays – from longing for the country. [6] Fantôme – literally: ghost, ghost. [7] Bas-reliefs (from French bas-relief) - bas-reliefs. [8] Montagnes rocheuses – rocky mountains. [9] Convoi de 5 h. - by train at 5. [10] Membre de l'Institut – member of the Institute. [11] Endernier lieu - recently. [12] Arr?tant... d'Amalthée - catching Amalthea the goat. [13] Sujet - theme; here: monument. [14] Pierres gravées – sculptures in stone. [15] Quai - wharf. [16] Laide comme cochon – ugly as a pig; bouche comme derri ?re - mouth like ass. [17] Il est sorti - he left; Il n' ya pas – there is none (in the French usage above, these phrases are incorrect and ridiculous).[18] All the phrases quoted by Chopin consist in wordplay resulting from phonetic similarity: six chairs – horse racing with obstacles; who was caught red-handed in bed - caught at the time of the crime; what is father Gol?ze's tobacco - Pergol?se's Stabat; that her navel be painted - paneling was painted; so called because he was the most consumed captain. \r\n'"
Dear Miss de Rozi?res. Here is my letter to Warsaw, which I commend to you. This alleged letter from mine, you thought, was, imagine, a thick letter from the heart of Austria. I am writing about all this so that you would be willing to try to deliver the second letter I am sending to a certain Mr. Mikuli. Miss Etienne knows his address. Ask her to take the letter and have her give you a receipt (the letter may be valid). As soon as I receive a word from Ludwika, I will send it to you right away. Everything you do with Madame de Betuon will be good, only please do not make her return to the music she practiced, unless it is very necessary. Thank you in advance for your kindness. C. Kindly let me know when Franchomme leaves Paris, for I would like to send him my papers beforehand, if possible. [George Sand postscript with cordial greetings]
"It's stupid to always finish on a different day than it started. This letter takes five days to write. My Dearest! Yesterday they sent me your letter from Paris, in which you inform me that Mother and the Barcińskis are leaving. About ten days ago I sent a letter to Paris via Miss de Rozi?res, addressed to Mama in Nowy Świat. I hope that Zuzia has an order to receive my letter; if not, know that from here a letter to you went fuller than the one in which I write little, because I wrote out of the news there. You will also find a few words for Ludwika from my Châtelenko. With this letter here I am sending Miss de Rozi?res Louise's letter to Paris, to which she will probably write back, because she likes to write, and although she often has nothing to write about, it is a very pleasant flaw and I wish I was in a similar case. I am glad that you have sent half of you to the country, and that Henry is also out in the open air, but it is a pity that it could not be arranged so that you too. I'm sure last year's trip is one of the reasons, and I can't get mad at myself enough. But you also have nice memories, so let's enjoy what was, and let's hope that we will see each other before the end of the railway and that Kalasanta will still be scratching, bitten by rougetes, which are less here this year, and the hypothesis is, that last year they ate too much of Kalasanty and died. you are hot; here, too, a few days ago it was extremely hot, but now it rains often, and changes are waiting for the harvest, which this year, though plentiful, will be late. Last Sunday they celebrated St. Anne, the patron of the local church. Because the yard changed this year in flower beds and flowers, so all the dances took place in front of the church on the grass. You remember the village festival in Sarzay, so I will warn not remind you of corneum [1], stalls, or dancers of various caliber. There were over a dozen friends here, including Ler[oux], whom Ludwika asked me about. He is now here, eight miles from here, in Boussac, a town where there is also a sousprefecture, as in Salliatre, in départ, de la Creuse. A very old town, a castle above Creuza with ancient memories. There are druid stones nearby; an area known for its beauty. There he has the privilege of a printing house, and there he already prints a daily which is edited in the local town and is called the Eclaireur. This printing house, however, is not yet through his new procédé, for as everyone has his ales, so too he has the fact that he begins and does not finish completely. When he throws a big idea, enough is enough for him. The same with that new machine which he has not finished, or which he has not finished enough. It works, but not exactly enough. This already costs him and his closest friends tens of thousands (among them especially the owner Mr. Koko); it would take twice as much besides the will, and especially perseverance, and together all this is impossible at this moment. However, the thing exists and soon some exploiteur will take to it, dress up his feathers with it and show it to the world. There have been and there are still people who want to buy an invention that he doesn't want. Apart from two volumes on hidr. [?] there are plenty of his articles in the Encyclopaedia and in the ""Revue"", where Consuelo. Everything he wrote sticks to one another. There are some highly acclaimed discours in Revue [3], some unfinished. All this was on the table in the Square d'Orléans. What's the news to you? That Mrs. Viardot has already gone to the Rhine, where Meyerbeer, in the name of the Prussian king, invited her, as well as Liszt, Vieuxtemps, etc. The English queen will receive the kingdom there, who already with Fr. Albert, her husband, went to Germany. Mendelssohn is also busy in Koblenz with musical preparations for his king, for Queen Victoria is to be received at Stolzenfels. Liszt tells himself to shout er lebe! [4] in Bonn, where a monument is erected to Beethoven and they also expect to be crowned. In Bonn they sell cigars: Véritables cigares ? la Beethoven, who probably only smoked Viennese pipes; and they have already sold so much furniture, old offices, old regiments [!] after Beethoven that the poor composer de la symphonie pastorale would probably have had a huge furniture trade. It reminds me of that concierge [5] in Ferney who sold a lot of Voltaire canes. M. Blanqui, a professor and an old acquaintance of Kalasante, received the order from the young Spanish queen on his return from Madrid, where he had been sent with M. Salandroure, manufacturer of the famous d'Aubusson carpets, to visit the industry there. Nobody cares or asks about it, but it came to my mind because he is a friend of Kalasanty's. As for Mama the bringer, she doesn't need to know anyone, she knows everyone. Where is Lorra going? I feel sorry for Antek Wodz[inski] that he will have a second child. Méry must know of her young friend that she was weak and that she was better off; the husband of the late Dupont told me about it in Paris. Nowak[owski] plays my Berseza, I'm glad to know that; I seem to hear him from a distance. Hug him. Sonata to Elsner [dedicated] was published in Vienna by Haslinger, or at least he himself sent me a printed épreuve [6] a few years ago to Paris; but since I didn't send it back to him corrected, I just told him that I would prefer many things to be changed, so perhaps they stopped printing, which would be very nice... Oh, time is running out! I don't know what's going on, but I can't do anything decent, and yet I'm not lazy, I don't wander from corner to corner as with you, I just sit in my room all day and evening. However, I must finish some manuscripts before I leave here, because I cannot compose in the winter. After your departure, I wrote only this sonata. Now, apart from the new Mazurkas, I have nothing ready to be printed, and I must. Stagecoaches are heard. They pass behind the garden; will it not stop, from which you will not get off! Write to me honestly whether the Marżolen council did well to Ludwika, and whether Antek Bartolo is completely healthy. I am entertained by Mameczka with her catwalk. However, I will honestly say that, not knowing her current health, I dare not insist on a winter with her rheumatism. It is to your wisdom that I leave my joy, but I protest against all tricks with my whole soul. Besides, if Mameczka were suffering here, and I was suffering too, Izabela would come to take care of us both, her husband for Izabela, and after them you; Zuzia and Mrs. Lutyńska will manage. voil? out . [7] Come on, Ludwika, tell your husband to take credit sometimes too. Briefly, but just let me say ""good morning"", because I miss it on your list. Let him always write the house number in every letter. I never remember either yours or Antol's number: I have it written down, but in Paris, so I always have to address it with circumlocations. You must have a hard head to write so many times and never remember your number. I came back from a walk with Sol, who gave me a good walk in a convertible accompanied by Jacque. Jacques is called a huge dog of very fine breed, which was given to the Lady of the House to replace old Simon, who is very old this year and has a paralyzed leg. An inseparable friend of fat Koko, although the breed is wonderful in its own way. Like rain, he packs into a convertible, and when he lies down, his head gets wet on one side and his tail on the other, despite his most witty position to protect himself from the rain; but too big for such comforts. The lady of the house is at the moment with her neighbor, a beloved doctor, with a sick man in the village, who urgently wants to go out with a fever to that woman, who is remet les fourchettes de l'estomac [8], a few miles from here; neither can be persuaded. “They wrote to me from Paris that Artôt, the violinist, had died. That boy, so strong and robust, thick and bony, died of consumption in the Ville d'Avray a few weeks ago. Before leaving, I was in Ville d'Avray (we passed that way on our way to Versailles) to visit my goddaughter, Albrechtówna, I was traveling together with Mrs. Damoreau. She took care of him and even then told me that he was very bad. I feel sorry for Madame Damoreau, for she was genuinely attached to him. They traveled together last year to America. No one, seeing us both, would have guessed that he would soon die of consumption. Already Jan, as usual, has been calling for dinner for a quarter of an hour. (The Lady of the House promised him she would pour cold water on him if he rang too long.) I have to shave because I have a big beard, so I'm skipping this letter again. ""I've already shaved, but that's why I'm not fatter, although they say I'm fatter here; but I am far from the late Okolov. Hug his sister-in-law there (if I'm not mistaken, the one with whom I often played four-handed on Miodowa Street, where I often saw Miss Czajkowska). Write to me about my godparents. Embrace Prussia. Give your hand to Połcio, an old friend. Tell Elsner to come here to Néris to heal his leg. Is Dobrzyński going to Paris? I believe he had success with Meyerbeer. I'm glad you'll hear David's symphony. Apart from a few truly Arabic songs, the rest is only for the merits [9] of the instrumentation. But what surprises me is that you prepare costumes and decorations for this, while here they performed it in black tailcoats and sitting at the desks on stools, with sheet music in their hands or on the desks. Certainly not even his greatest admirers (of which fewer and fewer, as usual after such engouements) [10] did not think about it. Watch out for the singing of the muezzin (as they call the one who sings from the moskets (turrets) every hour according to the custom of the Arab service); this is to which the Arabs from Alger at the first concert here nodded their heads and smiled with pleasure. Soon I will write to you again that I love you dearly. I would like to write a lot, but not knowing where to start, to want to chat in writing, how it was chatted in the room in the morning over chocolate in the morning. I hug you all. soyez bénie du bon Dieu toujours.[11] [Continued by Chopin] They didn't want to let the letter go without saying a word. Such dear ones (I write in plural, because they are like that for everyone) – Mr. Brunel, that engineer (French by birth), who London's Thames Tunnel has invented, among other important works of his, he has now invented a new locomotive with which it will be possible to run 50 English miles an hour. This machine is to be on eight wheels. It will not make the railway pleasant. Sol, who brought me chocolates for a snack, makes me write that she hugs Ludwika. He has a very good heart. I'm not surprised that you don't know Isidore yet, because it hasn't been published in volumes yet. And Teverino won't start writing columns for La Presse until next month. nb. columns have no contact with the avec le corps [12] of the journal, which has completely opposite ideas about many things. [1] Cornemuses (from French cornemuse) – bagpipes, bagpipes. [2] Exploiteur - an exploiter. [3] Discour - dissertation. [4] Er lebe (German) – long live! [5] Concierge - caretaker, watchman. [6] Épreuve – here: first correction. [7] Voila tout - that's it. [8] Remet les fourchettes de l'estomac - removes the forks from the stomach; here is a phrase for a village medicine man. [9] Meryt - here: value, advantage. [10] Engouement - adoration, delight. [11] Bonjour ... toujours - Good morning, my dear, I love you dearly; may the good God bless you always. [12] Avec le corps – here: with an ideological direction."
We will leave tomorrow at dawn. We have found a horse for the carriage and are taking my brother. Since I will not be able to write to you on the journey, I want you to at least have a word from me in Paris. It makes me sad to think that you're in a carriage, that you're having a bad night. Try to arrange your time so as to rest at least three nights in Paris, and do not tire yourself too much. Love me, dear angel, my dearest happiness. I love you.
" am writing to you without a dictionary to entrust a letter to my mother to her. You gave me permission to do this. Thank you in advance and please take care of your health. Here we are doing well except for the pianos, one of which does absolutely nothing and the other very little. This very little is of course mine. Zuzanna told me how kind you were to my number 9. My gratitude for this is so great that I wish I could write you a long and interesting letter to express my gratitude. But I am unable to do so, so I confine myself to clasping Her hand. Fr. Ch. Have you been sent Sonata and Lullaby? Please send me a message about yourself. Don't go into the crowd to watch the sailing competition. Please respect yourself, and if by any chance a letter comes from Warsaw, please send it to me. I send my letter sealed, but if you could put in a word for Ludwika from yourself, it would give her great pleasure. Please tell Mrs. Etienne to give my address to the carriers of the two music magazines to be sent here. [Position George Sand - Translation] Good morning, sweetie, we kiss you, we're fine, but we're really lazy. Except for me, who is still busy writing a novel, although I sleep and walk a lot. Solange dresses, undresses, mounts and dismounts, scratches herself, yawns, opens and closes a book, combs her hair, considers Maurice a dummy, and finally, as you can see, she is so busy, and with such important matters, that before dessert doesn't make it to dinner. Typhus still reigns here, and it is necessary to guard against it with the help of God; I nurse the sick and hope to avoid it. No one has died with us so far. Uncle Polit has become very sedate. He wears a tailcoat every day, wears a hat ? la bolivar, gloves made of black silk nostrils; his waistcoat is a bit too short, but his belly is too prominent, his complexion slightly copper. He looks like a bull trader on Sunday; finally, he doesn't turn gray and repeat the same words over and over again. He claims that he has never more deserved the love he inspires in you. Maurycy scribbles, banters, strokes his mustache, laughs derisively, wears boots with leggings, smells of the stable and adores you. Take care. Play the piano, be surrounded by flowers and love us. I would like to send you carnations and my own thoughts. I have not seen such beautiful ones, but perhaps they are more beautiful in Paris. Write to us. I kiss with all my heart. GS"
"Dear Fryderyk! You made us very happy with the news of your health. P. Gudman [Gutmann] told us that when he saw you in September, you looked good; God, let it be so. My health for my age, by the grace of Providence, is good. I go out little; even at Ludwika's I rarely visit, so as not to cause suffering equal to, and perhaps greater than, those around me. Thank you, dear son, for all the gifts that I receive from you at every opportunity; they are nice and dear to me, but I do not go anywhere, I see few people, and you, beloved, spend in vain for me. I had a great pleasure recently because of you. Mrs. Obreskow and her husband were passing, as she said, to her daughter in Athens; she spent only a few days in Warsaw. She was with me. What a kind woman! You can fall in love with it from the first sight. Maybe it just seemed to me that she spoke so much good about you and the lady of the house, that she cares so much about your health. She brought me a gift: a teapot on a tray, a pot and a sugar bowl, saying that every day when drinking tea, I should remember my son's friend; how polite and courteous it is. He is to be in St. Petersburg in the summer, in Paris next winter; he is to pass this way in autumn and he wants to take me to you. It's good that it's still so far away, maybe her design will change, which I would be very happy about, because going with her, I would have to stay with you all winter, and what would you, poor one, do with me? I would hurt you knowing your heart, you would be restless all the time, you would think I was bored, not comfortable enough, and so on. No, my dear child, I will not do that, especially since there are people with you who take care of you, for which I am very grateful. Maybe God will let me see you again; I do not lose hope because I trust in His mercy. - In this new year, may Providence pour all blessings on you, this is what Mother wishes you from her heart. Zuzia sends you her wishes and Lutyńska. Mrs. S. my respect."
Mrs. Sand sends 150 francs. for the purchased object. Ch.
 My life. H. Lucas sent a box via Louis Blanc for Mrs. Sand today. And since she wants to take her cousin with her to the box, let me come to you for the third act. I'll chase the first two by the chimney. I hug you most sincerely. Your always Ch. Her box number is 6 on the first one.
My dear. With a little good will, imagine that I am writing this letter immediately after receiving the mail that brought me good news from the Lord. Since my heart has nothing to do with this delay, please accept these words as if they had come in time. If the page attached to the letter is not too crumpled, and there is a suitable opportunity, you will deliver it from me to Mrs. Mendelssohn. Let me also remind you that even if you have friends and admirers more close to you and more worthy of you, you do not have a friend more kind to you. Always wholeheartedly devoted to Chopin.
You have allowed me, dear friend, to send through Franchomme manuscripts for Mr. Stern, manuscripts for Wessel (with a note without specifying the exact address) and a short letter with an attached sheet for F. Mendelssohn. I changed my mind about the proposed dedication. (When in doubt, don't do anything.) I've put the titles and numbers of the works everywhere, as well as the date of publication (November 25th of the year). I'm causing you a lot of trouble, aren't I? – I hope to come soon to apologize to you, because the weather is very bad. Please kindly pay my respects to Miss Léo. Sincerely, F. Chopin. Please don't forget to say hello to PP for me. Valentin and your lovely children.
My dear Life! Jan visited you twice to tell you that I had come, but those wigmakers probably forgot to tell you. We'll have dinner together at Leon's, and if you want tomorrow, I'll stay up until 2 o'clock, just like today I stay up all day. I'm just going to deliver the letter to the post office. – I'm at Frankom's [!] for dinner, and at 10 o'clock at home. If, on your way back from the opera, you want to stop at night, I will embrace you. I would go to you, but it's only very early in the morning, and in the morning, before I cough up, it's 10 o'clock. I hug you most sincerely. Your old Ch. Nohant I'm waiting on the 9th.
 You will receive a letter from Chenonceaux tomorrow. As there will also be one letter for me (I was told this but forgot to tell you), kindly tell Mirtile or the lady's concierge to bring it to me when she comes to you. It should arrive around 2.30. There will be a message regarding the final date of departure. Devoted Ch.
"My dearest. I have received your last letter, in which you write to me that you are in good health, with the exception of Bartek, who, however, is much better; that Mameczka endures the winter season quite well. It's not very cold here yet, black and damp. PS from Tuesday she came back with her son and daughter, and I am here for two weeks now. Usually, you remember, I return earlier myself, and this year the more so because I had to send John* away, to find another servant. [Chopin's footnote to the asterisk at the top of the page:] Every month for a year he wanted to go away, always protesting and crying that he loved me very much, and I would never have sent him away, but he was getting impatient with the others - the children made fun of him too much, so I couldn't keep it for yourself longer. He thought to the last that they would send Susanna away. Still, he was grateful every day. [Continuation of the letter:] For me, these are big scandals - because you need something very honest, but my friend Albrecht found me a Frenchman, Piotr - a very decent, neat and, I hope, faithful man who served for 7 years with my parents of my Waltz in E flat major (at Mrs. Horsford's). Clean very, a little slow, but I'm not impatient yet. Ludwika, who knows Nohant, may be interested in the fact that Luce, that girl, Françoisa's daughter, is here besides Zuzanna with her mistress - or rather Solange. Speaking of everything that Ludwika asks me about in her letter, everything is untrue and bears no resemblance to anything. LR was in perfect health, his children were weak with measles - and Maurice was to go in a few days, but because of the bad time he will not go, to his father, who had not moved from his estate in Gascony all summer. [In the note:] Never believe bad rumors, because a lot of people in the world who can't see happiness calmly. [Continuation of the letter:] Before coming here, after my departure from Nohant, she was PS in Chenonceaux near Tours with her cousins de Villeneuve. Chenonceaux is a castle very well known throughout France. It was built in the time of Francis the first by the famous traitant [1] (banker of the time) Thomas Boyer, who built it for a very long time. Being built in the middle of the Cher River. There are huge kitchens in the arcades on which the castle stands, so you can imagine what a building it is. Francis was the first to disinherit this banker from him and lived in it - and a lot of monuments from his time. Later, Catherine de Médicis still lived there (in the Huguenots here in the second act there is a decoration from this castle - I think Lud. saw it); also the wife of our Valois had spent her widow there. All the apartments are preserved [!] with furniture from those times - which probably costs thousands of dollars a year. For Ludw. on the fifteenth, or under the Regency, it came from the Vendôms to Monsieur Dupin (de Franceuil), to whom Rousseau was secretary. This P. Dupin is the grandfather of Mr. S., whose portrait above the fireplace in the large room downstairs, next to the dining room, in Nohant. Madame Dupin, his first wife, was famous for her brains and beauty, and in her time at Chenonceaux everything that had heads in the past century was there: Voltaire, Mably, etc., etc. There are also many manuscripts of Montesqui. Rousseau, in his Confessions, writes about M. Dupin. There are (in Chenonceaux) trunks of his correspondence with her, very interesting, but they will certainly never be published. P.S. invented some of Mrs. Dupin's manuscripts, reportedly very interesting, especially beautifully written. It was also there that Rousse's opera (Le Devin de village) was performed for the first time at the castle theatre, from which the overture is said to have been made by Monsieur Franceuil. You probably know that Rousseau made po?me and music that had great success 70 years ago. From this opera some things have caught on, and in France they know them well enough. I wrote to you about Chenonceaux, now about Paris. Well, Gavary is lovely Ludw. and to Jędrz[ejewicz] they bow (he sends her Massilion of his style) and Franchommy. I was there and there for dinner before the arrival of Mrs. S. and we talked about you a lot. I'm already starting my mill. Today I gave only one lesson, Mrs. Rothschild, and I canceled two because I had other things to do. My new Mazurkas came out in Berlin at Stern's, so I don't know if they will reach you; You, who are usually in Warsaw from Leipzig, have music. They are not assigned to anyone. Now I'd like to finish the Cello Sonata, the Barcarolle, and something else I don't know what to call it, but I doubt I'll have time, because the hustle and bustle is already beginning. I have a lot of questions whether I will not give a concert - but I doubt it. Liszt came from the province where he gave a concert, I found his card at home today. Meyerbeer is also here. I was supposed to be at Leon's tonight to see him there, but we're going to the opera, to the new ballet (new for P. S.) Le diable ? quatre, in which our costumes. – I am writing to you on Saturday morning after the ballet. Nothing has changed at the opera; it is like during your stay. We have seen nothing but this; neither the Italians, where they give Verdi music, nor Mrs. Dorval in the new drama Marie Jeanne, which is supposed to be one of her better roles. – Today, December 17. I interrupted the letter and could not sit down to it until today. It's very dark and ugly here today. The first representation today is to be at the Grand Opera of the opera Balfe, of what Les quatre fils Aymon did (I think we saw them together at the Comic Opera). Today's title is L'Étoile de Seville. [In the postscript:] Cyd, but not Cornel, only according to Calderon. [Continuation of the letter:] A poem by Mr. Hypolyte Lucas (poor writer, columnist). They don't expect much. Balfe is an Englishman who was in Italy and passed through France. – Tomorrow at the Italians Gemma di Vergi. But yesterday we were all together and Luce at the theater de la Porte St. Martin, where the new drama of Mr. Dennery (not very stout) was played, in which Mrs. Dorval is outstanding. Marie Jeanne's title. She is a commoner girl who marries a craftsman who leaves her in misery with her little son because of his bad conduct, and she, in order to save a child who has nothing to eat from death, takes the baby out of despair aux enfants trouvés [2] . The scene is extraordinarily rendered. They all bleat; I can only hear the rubbing of noses in the room. She has not had a similar role since her Mrs. Dorval's youth, that is since the role of Ten Years of the Jouer's Life. From the time I wrote this higher poem, I have been to Balfe's opera; not good at all. They sing as best they can, and I was sorry that such resources were gaspilized [3], while Meyerbeer (who sat quietly in the box and read the libretto listening to it) has two operas completely ready: Le Proph?te et L'Africaine. Both in 5 acts, but he doesn't want to give them to the opera without a new singer, and Mrs. Stolz, who rules the director, won't let anyone better than herself. Beautiful decorations, very rich costumes. I sent two volumes through Glücksberg: the Old and New Testaments with English engravings for Ludwika and Izabela. These engravings were considered very beautiful here; there are paintings by the most famous masters of the old and new school: Raphael, Rubens, Poussin. Many of these paintings are here in the Louvre, maybe Ludwik will remember. To Antonio, who has no children, I sent Gavarni's small volume of drawings des enfants terribles [4], etc., so that he would laugh and remind himself of the local light, stupid joke. Kalasantego proverbs of Grandvilla's drawings. Grandville was the first of his kind to start a career, and no one understood it better than Gavarni. You've probably seen Grandville's Lafontain. You can see if you can have a head on your shoulders before the New Year here. The bell keeps ringing [!] at the door. Today everyone here at home has a cold. - It's no wonder that I cough unbearably, but the Lady of the House has such a cold and sore throat that she has to stay in her room, which makes her very impatient. – The more health you usually have, the less patience you have in physical suffering. There is no cure in the world for this, even reason is useless. “All of Paris is coughing this week. Last night there was a huge temp?te [5] , thunder and lightning, hail and snow. The great Seine - a little cold, but unbearable humidity. Klengel from Dresden is here and Mrs. Niesiołowska. He was with me; I promised him to be with her. “Maybe you don't need to talk about it. – Liszt was also with me, he was talking about M. Calergis, and after my lines I see that they said more about what happened. Titusowa's brother was here; healthier, he went to Italy. He told me a lot about Tytus, I loved him very much. - Hug Titus. You've probably seen Gutmann before. The chick I saw at the opera can also tell you that he saw me healthy. Here the new year does not advertise well for bad weather; merchants complain that there are not as many flâneurs [6] as usual. I haven't gone to town on my errands yet. I need to find something for my godmother; meanwhile my godfather won't have anything this year, but also why so far away! I would like to leave him a long succession someday, but it's not really in my nature. I'll think about when I go to bed and I can't sleep. Franchomme and I tried some of my Cello Sonata, and it was good. I don't know if I'll have time to print it this year. Fryderyk's uncle visited me at that time. Very dignified and loved, rejuvenated, plays the violin, he tells me, like when he was young, and doesn't cough. Fresh, kind, witty; straight, he holds himself beautifully, he doesn't wear a wig, only his beautiful gray hair, in a word, so beautiful that the young of the present may pass for old in comparison to him. Méry hasn't written to me for a long time, I don't know anything about him. Dear weak creature. – Today is Christmas Eve, our Miss Star. They don't know it here. As usual, they eat dinner at 6, 7 or 8, and only some foreign houses keep these customs. – For example, yesterday Mrs. Stockhausen did not have dinner at the Perthuis's (at my Sonata's), because she was busy preparing today's day for the children. All Protestant houses keep Christmas Eve, but the ordinary Parisian feels no difference between today and yesterday. Here is a sad Christmas Eve, because the sick and no doctor want; extremely strong runny nose, they lay down for good. Everyone in Paris curses for the climate, and they forget that in the countryside in winter it's even worse and winter everywhere in winter. A few months are hard to get through. I often ask myself how impatient people could live under a sky even more wicked than this one. Sometimes for a few hours of sun I would give a few years of my life. I have experienced so many people stronger and younger than me that I think I am eternal. Vernet's daughter and Delaroch's wife, his works Hemicycle au Palais des Beaux-Arts, died a few days ago. All Paris feels sorry for her. She was a very delicate-minded person, herself young, pretty, though very thin. She accepted in her house everything that was excellent here; adored by everyone, lucky at home, wealth and respect. Father was at the forefront of mourning and bleated like an ox; there was a moment when it was thought that the mother would go crazy. Yesterday and today here in bed is p. S. for a sore throat. A little better. In a few days it will probably be all right, but in the meantime I don't have time to write to you any longer. Sol also has a cold, I am the strongest. I embrace you most sincerely. Don't ever bother me. God be gracious to me. Love you. I wish you and all your friends a good year. F.Ch. PS I hug Ludwika. I am sending a note to M. de Rozi?res. I don't have time to read what he wrote. \r\n [1] Traitant - tenant of taxes. [2] Aux enfants trouvés – home for foundlings. [3] Resursa gaspillées (from French resources gaspillées) - wasted money, idle costs. [4] Des enfants terribles – children of the unruly. [5] Temp?te - storm. [6] Flâneur - here: buyer."
Dear Chopin. I want to ask you for a great favor: my son Artur is going to play your beautiful Sonata in B minor and he very much wants you to give him some tips so that he can penetrate your intentions as much as possible. You know how I adore His talent, and I don't think I need to express how grateful I will be for the favor I am asking for my rascal. He is at the Lord's service every day from two o'clock to four o'clock, and on Sunday - all morning. I apologize a thousand times for this importunity, but you have given me so many proofs of friendship that I count on it. A thousand nods from the whole family. Fryd. Kalkbrenner.
 Dear doctor. Mrs. Sand is unhealthy for two days. May the Lord kindly visit her today as soon as possible. – You will oblige your devoted Chopin.
" feel very guilty that I did not express to you my joy at your well-deserved success; but I must confess that I expected your visit from day to day, and I thank the Lord for fulfilling the promise given to me. I will most certainly be home Sunday from 5 to 6 or all evening, and I will be delighted to receive you as a person who wants to keep a place for me in his memories. Please accept my friendly feelings. Mars."
 I send back to you with great thanks the letters entrusted to me, and if you write to Mr. Hanka in these times, please thank him for his good memory and for the music he sent me. I wish the bad weather would prevent me from verbally thanking the Lord. F. Chopin.
 Commissar Pol is to be at my host's tonight. for the battle of two tenants who had a fight in the courtyard. So you better not come today.
Mr. Józef will allow the giver of this ticket to go up. F. Lamennais.
 I don't want to interrupt the lesson - but I wish you the best wishes on your name day. Please God! submit future ones already in free and independent Poland. Things are going great in Krakow. - Our Witwicki is happy that he is so close to the fire. Best regards and hugs Bohdan Zaleski.
"Dear Chopin. Mr. Benacci, a partner in the house of Troupenas, and, in my opinion, the most intelligent, most generous publisher in France, asks me for a few words of recommendation to you. I give it to him all the more willingly because I am deeply convinced that in all circumstances you will be completely satisfied with his conduct and his energy. Mendelssohn, who met him in Switzerland two years ago, made him his exclusive publisher for France, and I intend to do the same for my part. It would be a real satisfaction for me if you would be willing to entrust him with some of your manuscripts, and if this letter could contribute to your decision; I know that Mr. Benacci would be grateful to me. Always yours, with deep and cordial friendship F. Liszt."
Thank you a million times for your good letter, Ms. I attach mine to my mother. It's getting hot. The refrigerator will be on time. Thank you once again. Everybody is doing fine. We are expecting Maurice soon. Most beautiful compliments. Ch. If you ever post anything here, please kindly include my little Mozart Requiem score which I left under 5 (or 9) - it's with Stabat . They send you thousands of tenderness and will write to you.
Dearest friend. If I have not written before, it is not because I have forgotten it, but because I wanted to send you at the same time my unfortunate manuscripts, which are not yet finished. “Meanwhile, I am enclosing a letter for Mr. Brandus. When returning it, be kind enough to ask for a few words of answer, which you would kindly send me, for should anything unforeseen occur, I shall have to turn to Meissonnier, since their proposals are the same. My dear, I'm doing my best to work - but somehow I'm not getting it - and if it continues like this, my works will not resemble the chirping of bee-eaters or even the sound of broken china. I need to come to terms with it. - Write to me. I love you as always. F.Ch. Thousands of bows to Mrs. Franchomme and words of friendship from my sister Ludwika. I kiss your dear children. Mrs. Sand is reminded of your memory as well as the memory of Mrs. Franchomme.
My life, I hug you. - Dear Delacroix, a letter from me will take you a long time. How do you live? - write a word. your lifelong. Ch. Here, by the grace of God, he is healthy enough.
" very dear friend. I wanted to send you to Auteuil to thank you for your kind words added to Count. Czosnowska - I was thinking of taking my manuscripts to Paris, but the beautiful summer this year keeps me here and I must trouble you with my shipment to London. At the same time, would you like to send, as usual, a bill with a two-month deadline, please, if necessary, kindly send it to me for signature. This time it will be ?30 sterl. I hope you, Mrs. Léo and your lovely children have enjoyed this wonderful summer and that your stay in Auteuil has done you good. I cough less than usual, I work a little - and I love the Lord always. Sincerely, F. Chopin. Respect to Mrs. Léo; would you please remind me Mr. and Mrs. Valentin."
"Dearest friend. Here are 3 of my manuscripts for Brandus, 2 and 3 for Maho, who will give you a fee from Härtel (1500 fr.). Do not deliver manuscripts before receiving payment. – Send 500 fr. in your next letter, and keep the rest for me. I am causing you a lot of trouble; I wanted to save you some time by going to Paris this month, but - but - but. Ask Maho not to switch the manuscripts intended for Härtel; I will not proofread the Leipzig edition, so it is important that my manuscript be clear. Also ask Brandus to send me two prints so I can keep one. Now how are you? And your Lady and your dear children? I know you're in the countryside (if St. Germain is a village) - which should do you all very well due to the beautiful weather that continues all the time. - Corrections are already beginning - I would chat with you endlessly, and I have no time to start the letter anew, because Eug. Delacroix, who is kind enough to take away these few words, leaves at this moment. He is an artist worthy of the highest admiration - I spent lovely moments with him. He loves Mozart – he knows all his operas by heart. I'm definitely putting the same blots on today. Forgive me. Goodbye dear friend. I love you always - and I think about you every day. F.Ch. Pay my respects to Madame Franchomme and kiss your dear children."
Dearest friend. I hasten to send you a draft for Wessel before you leave for Normandy. A thousand thanks for the whole thing, as well as for the good news. At the end of October I will visit you in Paris. Please keep your friendship for me and believe in my sincere devotion. F. Chopin. Respect to Mrs. Léo and Mr. and Mrs. Valentin. Mrs. Sand is recommended to your memory.
"Dearest friend. I am very sorry that Brandus is not here, and Maho is yet to accept the manuscripts he has asked me for so often this winter. So we must wait, and meanwhile, kindly return to this matter as soon as you think possible, for I would not like it to be prolonged, for I have sent a copy to London at the same time. - Do not tell them that - if they are skillful merchants, they can deceive me by pretending to be honest people, - And since this is all my present fortune, I prefer that the matter take a different turn. Be so good as not to give them my manuscripts until you have received the agreed cash, and send me five hundred francs. Keep the rest until my return to Paris, which will probably be at the end of October. Thank you a thousand times, dear friend, for your good heart and friendly suggestions. Save your millions for another time - isn't it enough that I manage your time? I'm glad you're all in the village. Mrs. Franchomme, it was very much needed, as well as your beloved children after measles this winter. I hope to find you in good health. – Adieu, my dear, write to me and love me as I always love you. Ch. Warmest greetings to Mrs. Franchomme. - I kiss your children. Mrs. Sand sends you a lot of kindness and reminds you of the memory of Mrs. Franchomme. Ch. Miss Rubio, I will answer. If Miss Stirling is in St. Germain, don't forget to commend me to her and Mrs. Erskine's memory. Please add to the title of the Polonaise: ""dedicated to Mrs A. Veyret""."
"Dear Miss Rubio. I did not immediately reply to your nice letter with the announcement of her wedding, because I was counting on being in Paris at that time, and I thought that I would be able to wish you both personally. Since my departure from here is postponed indefinitely, I was about to write a few words when a note from Madame de Beton informed me that you were leaving Paris with no hope of returning. I didn't know where to write anymore. Fortunately, I have received your second letter announcing Mademoiselle de Rielle's wedding. So thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to express how happy I was to hear about your marriage to Mrs. Rubio. I am sure that you do not doubt for a moment the sincerity of my wishes; I wish with all my heart that you would find the happiness that is absolutely due to you. Would you like to extend my warmest wishes for prosperity to Mr. Rubio - and please count me always, whether in Rome or in Odessa, among your best friends. Yours faithfully, F. Chopin."
"Dearest friend. Thank you from the bottom of my heart for all your efforts with Maho and for your money letter I just received. ""The day of publication seems good to me, and I ask you for nothing more than to let Brandus not sleep on my case or forget my accounts."" I am very glad that both you and all your beloved family are healthy. I hope to see you in a month - in the meantime I kiss you heartily and with all my soul. Ch. Kind regards to Mrs. Franchomme. Kiss the children. If Mrs. Rubio is no longer in Paris, drop this letter at the Milan post office. Write to me - I need it very much."
" am sending you, dear Miss de Rozi?res, a supposedly urgent manuscript (you will find blank sheet music, which I give you for your use); this is a lie invented so that Peter can bring Havana tobacco. Please give it to Peter no earlier than on the day of departure, Wednesday the 22nd at 7? in front of the Notre Dame de Victoire church. May you be so kind to do everything in your power to get P. Sand to your hands. I trust your friendship for her. Ludwika sends kisses. Thanks, thanks in advance for your kindness. Please also check Peter's to-do list so he doesn't forget anything. Adieu! Good morning, good evening, good night, I shake your hand. Dedicated to Mrs. Ch."
"Ten times started, I'm sending it today. I am sending a word to Ludwika from the Lady of the House. My dearest. You're probably on vacation already. Everyone in the house: and Mameczka from Miss Józefa, and Ludwika from the Ciech[omski] family, and Antkostwo from the mineral water garden returned with a supply of health for the winter. May God give you all the best. It was such a beautiful summer here, as they do not remember for a long time, and although it was not a very fertile year and in many places they are worried about winter, here they do not complain, because the grape harvest is extremely beautiful; and in Burgundy even more beautiful than in 1811, as far as qualité is concerned, not quantité.[1] Yesterday, the lady of the house here made preserves from Alexandrian grapes called. These are very large clusters of the muscat variety, but which do not fully ripen in this climate, and therefore wonderful for preserves. But of other fruits, little was born. Lots of leaves, lots of green and lots of flowers. The new gardener. Old Piotr, whose Jędrzejewiczship was seen, dismissed despite 40 years [of service] (during Grandmother's lifetime), as well as kind-hearted Françoise, Łucja's mother: the two most ancient servants. God grant that the young and cousin will like the new ones better. Sol, who was very weak, healthy and who knows, maybe in a few months I will write to you that she is getting married to that young, beautiful boy about whom I wrote to you in the previous letter. The whole summer was spent here on various walks and excursions into the unknown regions of de la Vallée Noire. I wasn't de la partie [2] because these things tire me more than it's worth. As tired as I am, as merry, so it affects everyone's mood, and less fun with me young. I wasn't in Paris either, as I expected, but I had a very good sure chance to send my musical manuscripts, which I took advantage of, and I didn't need to move. But in a month I'm thinking of being in Squara and I expect to find Nowak[owski] about whom I only know through Mr. de Rozi?res that he left a card in my apartment. I'd love to see him. But they don't want him here. I will remember many things. I'll talk our language too, because I don't have Jan here anymore, and since Lorca's departure I haven't spoken a word in my own way. I wrote to you about Lorca. However polite they were to her here, after she left they did not stay with a big heart. My cousin didn't like it, so neither did my son; hence the jokes, from the jokes of rudeness, and since I didn't like it, there is no more talk of her. It took such a kind soul as Ludwika to leave a good memory for everyone here. The lady of the house near Lorca often said to me: Votre soeur vaut cent fois mieux que Vous, to which I replied: Je crois bien. [3] Let Izabela also write to me whether Antoni's parents are alive, as well as various such things. For Jaś spoke after eight years with regrets that he had not listened to me, but that now he was working as best he could and was trying to benefit from the lessons he had learned in Grignon in the past. Healthy and well-intentioned [4]; in Gascony he sits and works. I wrote to him and I still want to write. Today the sun is shining beautifully, they went for a walk; I didn't feel like it and I'm taking advantage of this moment to sit with you. That dog Marquis stayed with me, he's lying on my sofa. He is an extraordinary creature: his wool, like marabou, white, p. S. cares for him every day, so he is as intelligent as can be. Even has original things not to be guessed. For example, he will neither eat nor drink in a gilded vessel; he moves his head and turns it if he can. I read in the Press, among other things, the name of my godfather in Frankfurt at a congress of prison scholars. If he goes as far as Paris, I should be glad to see him, and I will write to M. de Rozi?res that if she finds a similar card at my concierge's, she will let me know immediately. Between the news, you probably already know about Mr. Leverrier's new planet. The Leverrier of the Paris observatory, finding some irregularities in the planet Uranus, attributed it to another planet, as yet unknown, of which he described distance, direction, magnitude, in short, everything, as Mr. Galle in Berlin and now [Adam] in London had observed. What a triumph for science to arrive at such a discovery by calculation! At a recent meeting of the Academy of Sciences, Mr. Arago had proposed that the new planet be named Leverrier. Mr. Galle wrote from Berlin that the right to name her belongs to Mr. Leverrier, but he proposes to name her Janus. Mr. Leverrier would prefer Neptune. But despite a certain part of the Academy of Sciences, many were in favor of naming the planet after the inventor who, by force of calculation, achieved extraordinary things, hitherto unheard of in the history of astronomy, and since there are comets Vico, Hind, Uranus called Herschel, why should there not be a Leverrier planet? The king immediately made him an officer of the legion of honour. You also probably know about the invention of de la poudre de coton [5] by Mr. Schönbein. Here they are curious, but have not seen yet. In London, tests in the presence of the 10th Albert (the queen's husband) confirmed that the force is greater, there is no smoke, no tar, no dirt, when soaked in water, it does not lose its power after drying. Explosion much faster than ordinary powder, because placed [!] on ordinary l'explosion a lieu [6] and ordinary will not ignite. But I write you scientific things, as if you don't have Antek or Bełza. Wish the last one the best of luck in the new state. My God, how happy Matusz[yński] was! Not a day goes by that I don't think about him. Now I don't have any of my school friends in Paris. But speaking of inventions, there is one more that is de mon domaine [7] . Mr Faber in London (Professor of Mathematics), a mechanic, very witty, set up an automaton which he called Euphony, which pronounces quite distinctly not one or two words but long phrases, and what is more, sings an aria of Hayden and God save the Queen [8] . Opera directors, if they could have a lot of androids like that, would do without choristers, which cost dearly and make a lot of trouble. It's a strange thing to come to this with leviers, soufflets, soupapes, chaînettes, tuyaux, ressorts [9], etc., etc. - I wrote to you in the past about Vaucanson's duck, which digested what it ate; Vaucanson also made an android that played the flute. But no machine has ever sung the words God save the Queen before. This Eufonia ? l'Egyptian Hall has been on display for two months (as Bartek knows, a place devoted to various curiosities). A great Italian opera rivalry is brewing in London next year. Mr. Salamanca, a Spanish banker, one of the members of the Madrid Chamber, leased a theater, the so-called Covent Garden, one of the greatest theaters in London, but which has never had great success for its location, because it is far from the beautiful world. Mr. Lumley, ordinary director of the Italian Queen's Theatre, a theater which was accepted by all the London world as fashionable, was in no hurry to engage his ordinary singers for the next year, whom he calmly trusted in his silk-lined theatre. Mr. Salamanca had forestalled him, and Grisi, Mario, and Persiani, in short, had hired everyone except Lablacha more expensively. So there will be two theaters. In addition to Lablach, Mr. Lumley engaged, they say, Miss Lind and Mr. Pischek (whom Berlioz says is the best Don Juan) (?). And since the custom of elegance in London means more than I don't know what wonders of art, the future saison will be interesting. They say that the old Opera (that is Mr. Lumley) will remain, for toutes les chances sont [10] that the Queen will attend it as usual. The Paris Opera has not yet given a Rossini opera. Habeneck, the director of the orchestra, had a severe apoplectic attack, which forced him to refrain from directing for several months. But he was well now, and partly behind him Mr. Pillet (the headmaster) was waiting. Italy has already started in Paris. A new singer for Paris, Coletti, a baritone, has performed in Semiramide and they say a lot of good things about him. Young, handsome in addition to talent, and various rows about him have been going on for a long time. His father made him a clergyman, he became an actor in Naples, leaving Rome. In Lisbon, they say, he turned his head for a few years, and if (what was said about it in the past) two ladies dueled for him there; if it also sings very well, it will hold. In Paris, I doubt they'll fight for him, but they'll pay him well, better than in Portugal. He also sang successfully in Madrid, where now great festivals are prepared for the wedding of the Queen with her cousin and Infanta, her sister, with the last son of King Philip, Fr. Montpensier. Dumas, accompanied by Mr. Maquet (a young writer who writes his columns for him under his direction), as well as Louis Boulanger, a famous painter, sent from here by the Minister of Enlightenment, Mr. Salvanda, with the mission of describing and painting all the ceremonies and adventures. They say a lot about the gifts that Fr. Mont[pensier] is driving for his fiancée. The queen cooks for her fiancé, besides her throne (very fat, though young), a collier of golden fleece diamonds, as well as a very rich sword with a diamond hilt, dont la lame a servi ? Charles III, et le bâton de capitaine général [11] . There are 17 delicious vehicles to be used to take you to the church of Atocha, where both weddings are to take place together, and to enter Madrid from Aranjuez (Aranchuez is pronounced). Like, for example, here in Versailles. If such descriptions amuse you, you probably have them in your journals by Dmuszewski. You probably know that Infanta is only 15 years old and that she is more handsome than the queen. She and her husband will return to Paris next month, where they are cooking a ball at the Hôtel de Ville and various other festivities. When I see her, I will write to you whether she is as beautiful as X-na Joinville (Brazilian princess), the most beautiful of the family: tall, pale, big eyes, brunette. “Miss Rachel, who, it was said, wanted to resign the French Theater out of weakness, better, and they say she will perform again soon. Walewski, you know that he married Miss Ricci, an Italian woman, whose mother Poniatowska, the sister of this amateur of music, who writes operas in Italy and was now in Paris, and Pillet gave him a poem for a great opera. The poem is Dumas' son and father. Because Dumas, though still young, has a son (before he married) who also writes. I do not know the title of Poniatowski's new opera, but it is to be represented this winter (?). It's thundering and quite hot here today. Gardener replants flowers. For the Jardin de plantes, new lands were purchased for nine times and something thousand, adjoining, among which des terrains once belonged to Buffon. Despite this, it will never be on the mountain and by the Vistula River, like yours, in such a beautiful location. Giraffa, whom I think the Jędrzejewicz family saw, died. I would be glad to never have other sad news than similar to have to write. This year somehow I got more faire part [12] weddings than deaths, and apart from old c-te de Sabran, whom I liked very much, about whom I may have written to you more than eight years ago, who wrote beautiful fairy tales, or rather did them by heart, because he didn't remember anything he wrote or very little, which some Krasicki imitated. Apart from him, I have not received any mourning invitation. But I married one elev in Bordeaux, the other in Genoa. In Genoa, where only now they erect a monument to Christopher Columbus, born there. From there I had to write to you about the palace that still bears his name and écusson [13] . Mrs. Viardot in Berlin with her husband and mother. She wasn't here this year. She will be in Paris in a month, where I will probably see her, and then she will return to Berlin for the winter, where she is engaged. They also say that besides Grisi and Persiana, Salamanca also engaged her for the next summer in London, but I don't know directement [14] . I would like to fill my letter with the best news, but I know nothing except that I love you and love you. I play a little, I write a little. With my Sonata with cello, once I am satisfied, the second time I am not. I throw it away, then pick it up again. I have three new Mazurkas; I don't think with the old holes [illegible word], but it takes time to judge correctly. When it is done, it seems to be good, because otherwise nothing would be written. It is only later that reflection comes and rejects or accepts. Time is the best censorship, and patience the most perfect teacher. – I expect a letter from you soon, however, I am calm and I know that with your large family it is difficult for you all to get together to write a word, the more so that a pen is not enough between us; I don't even know how many years it would take for us to talk pour ?tre au bout de notre latin [15] as they say here. Therefore, do not be surprised or sad if there is no letter from me, because nothing is the reason for this, but what is also with you; a certain annoyance is combined with the pleasure of writing to you, it is the conviction that there are no words between us: there are barely things. My greatest happiness is to know about your health and mood. Be always of good cheer; you have funny kids (I write in the plural, because I know how Antoniostwo are for my nephews), no way about Grandma! As long as there was health, everything was fine. I'm having a good time here because of the weather. Winter is not going to be bad, and with respect, it will go down anyway, as it passed, and thank God it's not worse. How many people are worse! It is true that many are better, but I do not think about these. I wrote to Mademoiselle de Rozi?res to tell my upholsterer to put up the carpets, put up curtains and curtains. Soon you have to think about the mill, that is, about the lessons. I will probably go from here with Arago, and leave the Lady of the house here for a while, whose son and daughter are in no hurry to come to the city. There was an issue this year about Italians for the winter, but young people in the countryside. Nevertheless, in the spring, if Sol gets married or Maurice gets married (both things in the workshop), opinions will probably change as well. Between us. It will probably end this year. The boy is 24 and the daughter is 18. But let's keep that between us. It's five o'clock and it's already so dark you can't see. I am finishing this letter. In a month from Paris I will write to you more. In the meantime, I'm glad to talk to Nowak about you a bit. Embrace Titus if you see him, and Charles the lodger; and my godfather when he returns; and if next year he goes to Brussels for a similar convention, which was this year in Frankfurt, because the session there is marked for next year, then I really hope to see him, because the railroad has been ready for a long time. Write to me about Józiostwo as well - and about all good friends. I hug you warmly, the legs and hands of Mameczka Ch. I feel sorry for the empty paper that comes to you without anything, but if I don't send ? la hâte now, I will start another letter tomorrow and it will never end. I am sending it to M. de Rozi?res, who will send the note to Louise as usual. I hug you all most sincerely. \r\n [1] Qualité... quantité – quality... quantity. [2] De la partie [?tre] – to participate. [3] Votre soeur... que Vous... Je crois bien - Your sister is worth a hundred times more than you... I think. [4] Well-intentioned (fr. bien intentionné) – full of good intentions. [5] La poudre de coton – gun cotton. [6] L'explosion a lieu - there is an explosion. [7] D mon domaine - from my field. [8] God save the Queen (English anthem). [9] Leviers, soufflets, soupapes, chaînettes, tuyaux, ressorts - levers, bellows, valves, chains, tubes, springs. [10] Toutes les chances sont - there are all the data. [11] Dont la lame... général - the head of which served Charles III, and the marshal's mace. [12] Faire part - notice. [13] Écusson - coat of arms. [14] Direct. [15] Pour ?tre... latin – a proverb meaning: to exhaust the topic; to your heart's content. [16] ? la hâte – in a hurry; right away. \r\n \r\n [1] Qualit é... quantit é - quality... quantity. \r\n [2] D elapartie [ ? tre ] - to participate. \r\n [3] V otresoeu r... que V ou s... Jecroisbien - Your sister is worth a hundred times more than you...I think. \r\n [4] D ozreintentioned (French bien intentionné) - full of good intentions. \r\n [5] L apoudredecoton - gun cotton. \r\n [6] L' explosionalieu - there is an explosion. \r\n [7] D emondomaine - from my field. \r\n [8] Godsavethe Queen (English) - God save the Queen (English anthem). \r\n [9] Leviers, soufflets, soupapes, cha î nettes, tuyaux, ressorts - levers, bellows, valves, chains, tubes, springs, \r\n [10] T outesleschancessont - all given. \r\n [11] Dontlalam e... g é n é ral - the head of which served Charles III, and the marshal's mace. \r\n [12] F airepart - notification. \r\n [13] É cusson - herb. \r\n [14] Directory - directly. \r\n [15] P our ? tr e... latin - a proverb meaning: to exhaust the topic; to your heart's content. \r\n [16] ? lah â te - in a hurry; right away. \r\n"
"Dear friend. I turn to you with a few more commands. I am sending you a huge letter to Mr. Léo, whom you can reach from ten to eleven o'clock. at ul. Louis le Grand No. 11. And the second is not a letter, but a cover with manuscripts for Schlesinger. He is to give you, as agreed, 300 francs for these 3 Mazurkas; if he made difficulties, do not be angry - forgive me for telling you this - just ask him to mark the day when he will pay you my due - tell him that when I was leaving I asked you to pay some bills for me. Indeed, if you see Meissonnier, let him give you my nurse's bill, but don't go to him on purpose. Save the rest of the money for me - as well as your friendship. I work a little. I draw a lot. I cough enough - I hope you're not imitating me. Yours with all my heart F. Ch. My respects to Madame Franchomme; kiss your dear children. Write me a word. Greetings to friends."
I, the undersigned, Fryd. Chopin, residing in Paris at ul. st. Lazare 34, I hereby confirm that I have sold to Breitkopf and Härtel in Leipzig the ownership of the following works of my composition, namely: Op. 60. Barcarolle for piano. op. 61. Polonaise-Fantasy, dtto. op. 62. Two Nocturnes, dtto. I hereby declare that I have transferred to them the right of ownership for all times and in all countries, including Russia, but with the exception of France and England, and I confirm the receipt of the agreed fee according to a separate receipt. F. Chopin.
" hope your migraine is over and that you are feeling better than ever. I am glad that all your company has returned and I wish you beautiful weather. It's dark and damp here, and you're always cold. Rom. he's doing better. He slept an hour last night, for the first time in seventeen days. “I saw Delacroix sending lots of love to everyone. He still suffers, but he goes to work in Luxemburg. – I went to Mrs. Marliani's last night. She was just leaving with Mme. Scheppard, M. Aubertin (who had the courage to read Ms. Mare au diable in front of the whole class as a model of style) and M. d'Arpentigny. They were going to listen to a new prophet whom the captain supports (not an apostle). He follows the new Fusionist religion; the prophet had an epiphany in the forest of Meudon, where the Lord God appeared to him. He promises that as the pinnacle of happiness, in some eternity, there will be no gender. Mrs. M[arliani] does not like this idea very much, but the captain is in favor of it, and whenever the Baroness mocks his fusionism, she accuses her of libertinism. ""I'll send you a fur coat and other errands tomorrow."" The price of the Lady's piano is nine hundred francs. ""I have not seen Arago, but he must be well, since he was not at home when Peter brought him your note."" Please thank the Marquis for sniffing my door. I wish you happiness and health. Please write when you need anything. Dedicated to Mrs. Ch. Your dear children [greetings]. I received your letter six hours late. The letter is good, good, perfect. So I won't be sending your errands tomorrow. I will wait. Won't you send your cloak to be repaired? Do you have suitable tailors there? So I will wait for your instructions. I'm glad the candy was a success. I was wrong about the tinder, but I don't know if there's enough tinder. I am going with this letter to the great post office before I go to Grzym. Mrs. Ch. \r\n \r\n \r\n —"
The Duchy of Czartoryski have the honor to ask JWP Chopin Fryderyk for Saturday evenings at nine o'clock.
 How nice it is from the Lady's salon that it is warm, from the snow in Nohant that it is charming, and from the youth that it is carnival! Do you have a sufficient repertoire of contredans to make an orchestra? Borie was with me, I will send him the piece of cloth you speak of. Rom. he has almost recovered, but Pleyel has relapsed, he is feverish again. He became invisible. I am glad that the bad weather here is not bothering you. May you be happy and healthy, as well as your loved ones. Dedicated to Mrs. Ch. Your dear children [greetings]. I am well.
"M. de Rozi?res found the piece of cloth in question (it was in M. Aug's cape box...); I sent it immediately yesterday evening to Bori, who, as Peter was told, is not leaving yet today. Today we have some sun here and snow like in Russia. I am glad of this weather because of you, and I imagine you walk a lot. Did yesterday's pantomime encourage Dib to dance? Best wishes for health to you and your loved ones. Dedicated to Mrs. Ch. Your dear children [greetings]. I am well, but I dare not go far from my fireplace."
 Would you please send me the Nocturnes Op. 55 and the Sonata in B flat minor (Troupenas edition) by F. Chopin.
 Dear doctor. Would you like to visit Mrs. Sand today around 6. Your complete Chopin.
Dear Chopin. I am sending you the tickets, which seem to be good, for tonight at Agn?s de Méran. I wish you weren't scared of the cold. Maybe he could go with Mr. Grzymala, and maybe you'll know where to find him. I pray that you do not get sick and stay well. Devoted with all my heart Eug. Delacroix.
"Your letters made me very happy yesterday. This letter should reach you on New Year's Day, along with the traditional candies, stracchinos and coldcream de Mme de Bonne Chose. Yesterday I dined with Madame Marliani, whom I took to the Odeon in Agn?s. Delacroix sent me a good box, which I honored Mrs. Marliani. To tell the truth, the performance did not impress me, I prefer Lucretia, but I am not a judge in these matters. Arago was with me, thin and hoarse, but always kind and charming. It's cold, but pleasant for those who can walk, and I hope you've gotten over your migraine and are walking around the garden as before. I wish you and all your family happiness in the coming year, and when you can, please write that you are healthy. Dedicated to Mrs. Ch. Your dear children [greetings]. I am well. Rom. is getting better; I'm going with him to the Hôtel Lambert today, putting on all possible coats."
" saw a 5 o'clock woman who told you to tell me that the commission she had couldn't do between 5 and 6 today, but she expects to do it tomorrow. I couldn't come to you because you are my Lord. Plater plated up to this point about the Mazurka played to be called at the ball. ""Now dinner, and then a few evenings await me, a great misfortune."" So until next year, better than this. Ch."
 My life. I remind you of the ticket to the Chamber of Deputies for my good Gutman (Ignace Gutman). If you cross my street, don't pass my door. Yours until death Ch. I am sending you the word of X-żna Galitzinowa - a footnote for you.
 My life. I thought it was from Pilet and I unsealed it - and I don't know what. They brought it at the moment. Ch. I'm waiting for a doctor who doesn't come.
" few of our friends are gathering at my place on Wednesday 20th January for my daughter's birthday. Would you like to join them? I cannot assure you that Mrs. Gangler, Miss Spitz, and even my daughter will not drag you to the piano; but if you are not too tired, the assurance of making us all happy may reward you for yielding to us. In any case, with or without hands, I want the Lord; if we cannot hear the Lord, let us at least see Him. Sincerely, E. Legouvé."
" Dear Sir. Would you like to come with us to the Conservatory on Sunday? My wife and I would be happy to listen to this beautiful music together with the Lord. I hope that the bad weather will not worsen your health; you were on the right track last time i saw you. Did you stay on it? Your very devoted Ernest Legouvé."
Beloved Szopenku, From the very sunrise I'm constantly flying around Paris, And since I don't have messenger legs, So I got pains in the back. And despite the sincere will, Turned upside down, I lie like a snowman of salt - It's hard to be a brave all day. To Łazarzowa Street, Even if life comes to save Or to break up with my own head, Believe me, I can't go. So, in writing, I am informing you of the report. I am asking you for an answer. To the next question: Our Lady is sitting at home And kindly asks you, That is, Grzym. will visit her today - Grzym. and you, and the rest is fine. This is from the rest of the acquaintance, Which will put in his heart For very untimely guests, So he will send them away. So perhaps you'll show me the hour And you'll forgive me This little fault That I didn't show up with my own body And spoke nonsense With rhymes with a pedal!... Your servant Ed. Chojecki.
" just addressed and sealed when your letter came so as not to put your name on it. ""As for Plichcina, she is to be with me (and I with her, if I can), but you know that I can't count on myself now."" – She will also probably use the rest of her moments in Paris differently than after visits like mine. Anyway, perhaps we won't meet - so it's best that you write (not to your son through her) only to her clearly what she should say to her son - or to me clearly (because from the last letter I wouldn't know what to say to Plichcina). So write to me clearly, with a shovel in the head, bluntly, what Plichcina should say and do - and I'll write to her right away if I can't leave. Just hurry up. Your Ch."
"Dear Mr Chopin. I have been to the Lord many times without having had the pleasure of finding him to return this book. I bet you won't like it as much as I like your songs. How happy I would be if for once I achieved in poetry what you always achieve in music. If you feel better, please come to us on Monday, the day after tomorrow, at nine o'clock for a cup of tea; you will only meet people who love you, and if the music you hear is not worthy of you, it is because it is not the music of the Lord. Devoted to E. Legouvé."
What's the matter with you, I haven't seen you since Friday. – Come to me at No. 9 between 12 noon and one. - You know that it is difficult for me to leave the house, and if you do not have the great pleasure of seeing me, then I have the great pleasure of seeing you for no other reason than that you are the same as you were at home before - and such an original as any other there is no sun. If you leave, even if you pay, we won't see each other again. You'll regret later that you didn't let me see more of your mustache. Ch.
 The minister allowed the concert. The concert is to be tomorrow, then, to finish once. Pantaleoni is about to sing a cavatina with Capulet and all he asks is that you let him know about Pacini's rehearsal time. If you want Pantaleoni not to sing, this is the way: tomorrow he will sing at another concert, so you can mark him a moment in our concert that is inconvenient for him. A. Jelowic.
Your letter amused me. I know many bad days, but as for the Good Days [Bonjours], I have never met any except the perpetual candidate for the Academy, Mr. Casimir Bonjour. My casual friend reminds me of a music lover from Châteauroux, whose name I do not know, but who, as M. de Préaux said, knows me well. If this continues, I'll end up believing that I'm important. So you now devote yourself entirely to dramatic art. I am sure that your prologue will be a masterpiece and that you will enjoy the rehearsals very much, but please never forget your shepherd or your muse. It is cold here. I've seen the Veyrets send their regards to you. I will not forget (Lady of flowers) Your gardener's bill. Please take care of yourselves, have fun, stay healthy all of you. Dedicated to Mrs. Ch. Your dear children [greetings].
 have received your good letter of Thursday. So you're also having a Porte Saint-Martin at your place? Crime Cave! – but it is extremely interesting. Your Funambules theater is now taking the place of the Comédie Fraçaise, and perhaps even the Opera with Don Juan, and is becoming more and more romantic. I can imagine Marquis and Dib's emotions. Happy listeners, naive and uneducated. I'm sure the portraits in the drawing room are looking at you in a way appropriate to the circumstances. Have your best fun. – Here, as I wrote last time, disease follows disease. I wish you health and happiness. Your dear children [greetings]. I'm holding on as much as I can. Dedicated to Mrs. Ch.
"What a great doctor you are! Miss Spitz lay in bed, Mrs. Gangler could not move; I showed them your letter: catarrh and rheumatism are gone! What a pity that you do not love yourself enough to heal yourself! Would you mind giving me Mr. Franchomme's address? Until the evening: these are words that are nice to write. Lord E. Legouvé."
" Weak as a dog, that's why I wasn't at your place. ""I know you're always on the island behind the ball now."" Tomorrow morning before 10 o'clock I will send you the rest of the unplaced tickets. And if I can, I'll go to the ball. They come from Nohant on Saturday evening, probably for dinner. If not tomorrow, then the day after tomorrow. Ask your good guard to send me back my bathrobe if it has been repaired. I hug you most cordially Ch."
"Dearest. I am sending you back from the ten entrusted tickets 5 that I could not place. I also send you 100 francs. for placed 5. I wrote the number placed on the envelope of the notebook. – If Cichowski could send me a laissez-passer, I would see you tonight. I'm having dinner at Rothschild's, and I'd go from there, but I'm afraid of the tail, which will be terribly long and cold then around 10 o'clock. – If it is possible, ask Cichowski, because apparently it depends on him. ""I hug you and would like to see you for a minute at the ball, if not elsewhere."" They're coming the day after tomorrow. I hug you most sincerely - your old Ch."
My most precious life. Please, be sure to come this evening around eight o'clock. You will find only Arago and Delacroix apart from pets. I will play a duet with Franchomme. But come, my Life, if only for a moment. Today is Wednesday, Ash Wednesday. Come at least to penance that you spent the carnival sadly. Your old Ch.
"Dearest Beloveds. If he doesn't write back right away, then he won't be able to collect himself and conscience pushes him away from the paper instead of driving him away. Mrs. S. has been here for 2 months, but she leaves for Nohant right after Christmas. Sol isn't getting married yet, and when they came here for the contracts, she didn't want to; I regret it and I feel sorry for the boy, because he is very worthy and in love, but it is better that it happened before the wedding than after the wedding. It's kind of postponed, but I know what's going on. You ask me what I will do with myself for the summer; nothing else but what I always do: I'll go to Nohant when it starts to warm up, and in the meantime I'll stay here and give a lot of not tiring lessons at home the old way. If Titus leaves as he had, I would be glad to spend some time here with him. About you, the Barcińskis, I don't think you've made up your mind, but if that were the case, I'd be able to see you somewhere, because I have time in the summer and I can use some of the money I earned in winter, if my health is good. This year my ruffs (crises) [1] (not to write like Albert's garde-malade [2] when he was weak: la cerise [3] de Monsieur), well, my ruffs are not very frequent, despite the great cold. I have not seen Mrs. Ryszczewska yet. Mrs. Delfina Potocka (whom you know how much I love) was supposed to be with her at my place, but a few days ago she left for Nice. Before she left, I played my Sonata with Franchomme for her at my house. That evening I had besides her the Duchy and the Duchess of Württemberg, p. S., and well warm. At that moment Franch[omme] brought me my box for tomorrow's Conservatory and bows [to] the Jędrzejewiczes. Poor guy, all three children are seriously ill with measles. Poverty that can't bother me. Nowak[owski] (whom Franch. often saw at my place, but he considered him a fool from the time he was conscious once, when he did not want to go with me to Legouvé for the evening, where he would have seen and heard, among the many learned worlds, e.g. Lablacha), Nowak can already be with you. Kind-hearted, but what a dummy, God forbid. For example, he had a letter to Janina. He tells me a few weeks before he leaves; I say too late, but that same day I took him to Gavard's for the evening where Janin was, and I wanted to introduce him, but he wouldn't. A few days later he comes to me and says that he has given the letter to Janin and that he will write an article about it, but he only asks me to write to him what he should include about his compositions, and to send it to Janin before 4 o'clock on the same day. I couldn't understand it. I ask who he was with at Janina's. He tells me that with the editor of ""Kurier"", a friend of Janina's intime. I know the editor en chef of ""Kurier"", Durieu; I'm asking, is this one? “No, some other name I've never heard of. But I think that maybe a friend of Janina's home, so I tell Nowak to be at my place the next morning, that we will go together to Janina's, so that he can tell him what he wants. I'm ordering myself to be brought in to Janina the next day, he and his wife welcome me as pleasantly as possible, I take it as a pretext that I have come to thank my compatriot for a good reception. And he told me that he told Nowak that a few words from me (un petit mot de Chopin) would be enough to recommend him – et imaginez-vous – he added – il se fait présenter par un imbécile dont je ne sais m?me pas le nom [4] , so this ami intime [5] is the one whose name Janin doesn't know. We both laughed at good old Nowak, and he understood those few words from me as an article; good-natured Nowak understands nothing in French except garçon, café, bougie, cocher, dîner, jolie mademoiselle, bon [!] musique [6] . Like Cichocki with the stove, so he here, I don't know what kind of furniture he spent time with, but towards the end I had to send for him to see him. His etudes are printed here through me and with my dedication. To him, this publication seems like everything in the world. And I'm glad they printed it. Too old to learn anything new or to get his mind straight. He's good, he'll eat what he bites, so I like him anyway because he's a very old friend; however, I forgot that there are still many people in the world who live here, do not know how, what for and for what. He therefore, as he can, loves us all so much; as well as I could, so I was helpful here, but I often knocked on his soul, but no one was there, and the wig (which Durand made him) covers great voids, but he understands and knows it himself, because how and where did he grow up? I also wanted too much from him, because I couldn't separate him from your memory. He gave me Kolberg's songs; good intentions, too narrow back. Often when I see similar things, I think that nothing is better, because the toil only distorts and makes the work more difficult for the genius who will one day unravel the truth. And until that time, all these beauties will be spiced nosed, pinked, with their legs cut off, or on stilts, and they will be a laughing stock to those who lightly look at them. I wrote for things you don't need, but a week ago. Today I am alone again in Paris. Yesterday, Mrs. S. Solange, cousin Luce left, and again three days passed. Well, yesterday I had a letter from the village that they are healthy and cheerful, only have rain, as we do here. This year's exhibition of paintings and sculptures started a few weeks ago, but you don't have anything very important known masters, only new talents have been found, that is, the sculptor who is only giving his second year for the exhibition, his name is Clésinger, and the painter Couture, whose painting a huge exhibiting a Roman feast in times of Roman decadence draws everyone's attention. Remember the name of the sculptor, I will probably write about him often, because he was presented. Before she left, he did her bust and Solange; everyone admires it extremely, probably next year they will be exhibited. I am riding this letter for the fourth time today, April 16, and I don't know if I will finish it yet, because today I have to go to Scheffer's to pose for my portrait and take 5 lessons. I wrote to you about the exhibition, now about the music. Well, David's Christopher Columbus has had almost as much success as Désert so far. I haven't heard it yet despite the 3 representations and nothing rushes me towards it. One of such youngsters, who still uses this word, used to say: on a crié bis, on a crié ter [7] (terre - land, land). The 4th part, where there are Indian songs, is said to be very pretty. Vieuxtemps gave a second concert yesterday; I couldn't be there, but Franchomme told me today that he played tremendously and that his new concerto was very beautiful. He was with me the other day with his wife; I played him for the first time. If it wasn't for the fact that after lunch yesterday at Leon's they sat me at the table to look at the album of one painter who traveled around America for 16 years, and I couldn't stop myself (wonderful things! but there were too many of them at once), I would have gone to the concert Vieuxtan. Tomorrow they promise a Spanish theater (in Italian opera). The Spanish troupe has arrived and they are to play at the manor today. The Queen of Spain is here now (Krystyna). Today, before the Spaniards, Miss Rachel plays Atalia at the court, in which she is supposed to be gorgeous; I haven't seen it yet. Atalia is given with the choirs of Gossec. Gossec was a well-known and respected French composer at the end of the last century. In Atalia's choirs (which are pretty boring) they usually ended up playing a very beautiful choir from Haydn's Creation recently. Gossec, already very old (35 years ago), on hearing this said in all naivety: Je n'ai aucun souvenir d'avoir écrit cela. [8] Everyone believed him very easily. I am sending Ms. de Rozi?res a note to Louise, but not from Ms. S., because they were in a hurry to leave. I had news from Nohant again today: they are healthy and arrange their house differently again - they like to change, arrange - and Luce, who went with them from here, also dismissed on arrival, as they write to me. So that of the old servants whom the Jędrzejewicz family saw, not a single one is left. The old gardener, who was there every 40 years, then Françoise, who was 18 years old, now Luce, who was born there and was baptized in one cradle from Solange, all this since the arrival of that cousin who calculates on Maurice, and he from her uses. It's between us. 11 am M. de Rozi?res has arrived, is warming herself by the fireplace, is surprised that my letter has not yet left, laments the age of her letter, and the other wants to write. A broken letter again; the day is over. So yesterday I was at Scheffer's, from there I visited Delacroix, but I had less lessons, I didn't feel like dressing for dinner, I lost the evening at home, I humming songs from the Vistula River. Today I woke up at 7 o'clock; my student Gutmann has come so that I don't forget his evening tonight; Durand came and they brought chocolate. My chocolate comes to me from Bordeaux, where they make it deliberately without any aroma in a private house, at the cousins of one of my good-natured elves, who feeds me with this chocolate. Today we still had frost here in the morning, but luckily it's tiny and certainly harmless to the crops that are expected this year. Grain is extremely expensive here, as you know, and much poverty despite great charité.[9] Mrs. S. helps a lot in her village and in the vicinity, as you can measure, and it is one of the 10 reasons that she left so early this winter, not counting her daughter's delayed marriage. Her last work that came out was Lucrezia Floriani, but for 4 months she has already ""Pressa"" her new romance titled (so far) Piccinino (meaning: small). The story takes place in Sicily. Many beautiful things; I have no doubt that Ludwika will like it more than Lucrezia, who also aroused less enthusiasm here than others. Piccinino is a sobriquet (nickname) given to one of the bandits there from his height. There are beautiful characters of women and men, a lot of naturalness and poetry, I remember with what pleasure I listened to the book. Now she starts writing something new again, but in Paris she never had a moment of quiet thought. - Three more days have passed, today is the 18th. Yesterday I had to give 7 lessons to some people who were leaving. In the evening, instead of getting dressed and going all the way to Faubourg St. Germain, Alkan and I went to see Arnal in Vaudeville in Mr. Duvert's new play Ce que femme veut. Funny Arnal, as usual, tells the audience how he was craving for chemin de fer [11] and how he couldn't get off anywhere until Orleans. Not a word is obscene, and everyone guesses, and huge laughter. Once he says that they stopped and that he wanted to get out, but they told him that they were stopping pour prendre de l'eau pour la machine et cela n'était pas son affaire du tout [12] and the like. Today is the 19th. Yesterday a letter from Nohant interrupted me. Well, Mr. S. writes to me that he will be here at the end of next month to wait for them. Probably Sol's marriage is going on (but not with the one I wrote to you about). May God give them good things. Everyone was happy in the last letter, so I hope so. If anyone, then p.S. worth happiness. At this moment, Turczynowicz brings me Stefani's religious songs, but I cannot see them before his departure, because he says that he is leaving today. I gave him my word of thanks because he asked for it in writing. If you meet Stefani there, say thanks, as well as to Kolberg for his hard work. I'm done, I have to give a lesson to a young Rothschild woman, then a Marseille woman, then an English woman, then a Swedish woman, and at 5 o'clock receive one family from New Orleans, who were recommended by Pleyel. Then Léo's for dinner, the Perthuises for the evening, and sleep if possible. I hug you. Nowak is probably already with you. healthy vernik; we start to learn a little. Hug Titus and write to me about him, also about Dresden. Lorca is not here; she wrote to me from Dresden, good-natured. Méry wrote to me from Rome; he goes to Hi?res, where there are Zofia Rozeng[artówna], who is quite healthy and happy; they wrote to me. I hug you and all of you most cordially. F.Ch. Jasio wrote to me that he was healthy, but, but! that he thinks seriously about getting to work, counting only on his own strength. I may forget many things that interest you, and I write less interesting things, but forgive me, because I don't always have the same disposition of my head; today I am determined to send this eternal letter, so please be content with the news that I am well and that today is the first sun in a week. \r\n [1] Crises - crises, illness crises. [2] Garde-malade - a nurse. [3] Cerise - cherry. [4] Et imaginez-vous... le nom - and imagine, he was introduced by some fool whose name I don't even know. [5] Ami intime - a good friend. [6] Garçon... bon [ ne ] musique - waiter, coffee, candle, carriage, dinner, pretty lady, good music. [7] On a crié... ter - encore was shouted, ter was shouted (a play on words: French la terre - earth and Latin ter - for the third time). [8] Je n'ai... écrit cela – I don't remember writing that at all. [9] Charité – charity. [10] Ce que femme veut – what a woman wants. [11] Chemin de fer - railway. [12] Pour prendre... du tout – to fill the locomotive with water, and he didn't mean it at all."
Thank you for the good news. I communicated them to Maurice, who is to write to you. He is fine and so am I. Here everything is as it was when you left, there are no violets, no daffodils, no daffodils in the garden. Your flowers were taken, your curtains were taken down, that's all. I wish you happiness, good mood, please take care of yourself, please write a word about everything as soon as you can. Devoted Ch. For young people [greetings]. \r\n
 Maurycy left yesterday morning in good health and on a beautiful day. The Lady's letter arrived after he left. I expect one more letter from you, in which you will specify the day of your arrival, to order lighting in your rooms. So I wish you good weather, beautiful thoughts and all the happiness that the world can give. Mrs. devoted Ch. For young people [greetings].
"You work wonders at work, but that doesn't surprise me. God helps you. The lady is healthy and will be healthy. The curtains are still here. The 30th is tomorrow. I do not expect you, however, not having received the final word yet. The weather is nice, the leaves would like to start to develop. You will have a pleasant journey without depriving yourself of hours of rest; I am asking for a word on the eve of departure, because you still need to light up your rooms. Please take care of yourself. I wish you peace and happiness. Mrs. devoted Ch. For young people [greetings]."
Dear Fryderyk! I commend to you the writer who shied away from the banker's office and chose a career as an artist only for the love of music, which he loves, and is working on it with real satisfaction. It is a musical peculiarity. Therefore, I beg you to grant his demands. At the same time, I inform you that in a few months my letters on music and its harmony may come out. I'll send you a copy by chance. Your loving admirer and friend Józef Elsner.
"Dear Master. From his family side, a supporter of art, beginning his profession, speaks to you in a voice that is timid but full of adoration, to you who were and will always be an unattainable Ideal for him. Please, venerable Master, accept the dedication of this almost first work of mine, and look at it with an indulgent eye. Certainly, she is unworthy of adornment of your name, which the whole world repeats with reverence and exultation, but let this name be a shield for her, under whose cover she can boldly set off into the world, let it surround her with the power of its glory and let it become an encouragement for the weak strength, but strong in zeal of your disciple. Let the words written below by the hand of the Honorable Nestor of Warsaw musicians speak for me and support my too bold request; let the fact that I am your countryman speak for me, that I was once your father's disciple, just as today, though far away, I have become yours. With adoration and deep respect, Emil Jenike."
How can I tell you how much I enjoyed your letter just received, and how I was filled with the details of everything that now interests you. None of your friends, as you know very well, wish your child's happiness more sincerely than I do. So please tell her that for me. I'm already well. May God always give you strength and energy. I wish you peace and happiness. Sincerely, Mrs. Ch.
 A few days ago I asked your mother to give you my best wishes for the future - today I cannot refuse to tell you how pleased I was with your nice note, from which I can see that you are so happy. You are at the peak of happiness - and I would like to see you like this always. With all my heart, I wish you continued prosperity Ch. See you soon, I hope.
Mrs. George Sand is honored to announce the wedding of her daughter, Miss Solange Sand, to Mr. Clésinger.
"And first of all, I congratulate my beloved Mother on my name day - the old way. My dearest. I have received your kind letter and I am glad that your health is good again. – On the 2nd of May I had a strong asthma attack and had to stay at home for a few weeks – but it didn't hurt me much, because now the weather, I'm completely healthy – they say it's a patent for long health – it doesn't matter now. But that was the reason why I haven't written to you for a long time. As for Sol's marriage, it was in the country during my weakness - honestly I'm not angry about it, because I don't know what face I would put on all this. “He, the groom, from the devil knows what family. It was presented here and no one dreamed that it would ever end there until the last one left for the countryside. However, I didn't like it right away that my mother praised him to the skies, that they went to his atelier almost every day to pose for busts - that they accepted flowers and various other miscellaneous things - dogs etc. every day (which is why I wrote in your past letter that I you'll probably hear more. Dear mother, but he has no practical sense, she invited him to the village; he just wanted it - he went, and since he was resourceful, they didn't have time to see how it all ended. Sol liked the presents - because he is the second Michel-Ange, because he rides a horse perfectly (he was a cuirassier, so no wonder). Maurice also followed him, because he hated de Préaux, because he was polite and familiar, and he immediately understood and began to incense him; add to that the secret my mother kept about it, so they didn't have about him, only such renseignements [1] as he liked to give - meanwhile here all friends, and Marliani, and Delacroix, and Arago, and me, the meager As for the person, we had news. Because he was in debt, that he was brutal and beat his mistress, whom he abandoned while pregnant, getting married, etc., etc., that he drinks (we've all seen it here, but it's down to genius). In a word, all the artists who have him as a man in Paris for a little bit of money cannot marvel at the fact that P. Sand chose him as her son-in-law. Everyone has been very pleased so far. ""He's as polite as he can be."" ""She's happy with her new state - she has cashmere and rides a horse, but I don't give them a year after their first child - and the mother will have to pay debts."" They were somewhat ashamed of me when they were in the countryside to write about it and I have the most interesting letters about it. This was the best thing for the son - because not only does he have a brother-in-law without a head in some respects, who he can use, but his father, the worthy Mr. D., gave nothing for a dowry, but not a pin, so he needs more will get. Besides, that cousin Aug[ustyna], whom he was supposed to marry someday, is also now marrying Rousseau, a famous and dignified landscape painter, who lived in the same house as Clésinger. This, according to me, the smartest, because the trouble and Mrs. Sand, and her son will go down from the head, because both are very advanced. ""She will support the whole family except for the girl before she gets married, and he with the promise of a marriage he has no desire to marry."" The girl was pretty, so it seemed to him that he was in love, and when it came to a decision, the young man always drew back. So everyone is here now to finish this business - and the day before in the church of Notre Dame de Lorette and in the mairie [2] there were announcements. - Then they leave for the countryside, I don't know if I'll go together - I honestly don't want to, because apart from the lady of the house, son and daughter, I have to get used to new figures, and I'm tired of it. Of all that Lud. she saw in the village, not a single one can be seen anymore. 5 new minions. – Between us, all true PS old friends can't help but marvel at this particular marriage – none of them attended the wedding. Sol is polite to me as always, he is also very polite, me as usual - but inside I'm sorry. – This mariage also made a bad impression on the Parisian world – because his statue, which was on display, shows a naked woman in the most indecent [3] position – so that pour motiver sa pose [4] she had to attach a hose to her leg – yes it twists so much that it's scary. It is simply a statue ordered by Moselmann (brother of Mrs. Lehon, whom I have written to you many times, the former Belgian ambassador), displaying his mistress. His and others car c'est une femme entretenue tr?s connue dans Paris [5]. – So people are surprised that a young person like Sol was passionate about a conjurer who exhibited such shameless voluptic [6] pour ne pas dire [7] works. But although there is nothing shameless in art - and indeed a bulging belly and very beautifully modeled breasts - I assure you that for the future exhibition, the public will see his wife's belly and breasts in the form of a new statue. Delaroche painted his wife's dead everywhere - and he will sculpt Sol in white marble - il est de cette force [8] . – Mrs. S. from the village wrote to me about him: il est hardi, lettré, actif et ambitieux [9] – these are supposed advantages! It was a moment of madness that did not last a month - there was no one to pour cold water. I got her first letter about the marriage project on May 1, and on the 21st it was after the wedding. It's a pity, taking things in simple terms - or maybe very well, considering it from the point of view that PS always works exceptionally - that everything turns out for its good - even what seems dissimilar at first glance. As I tell her she has her star guiding her; this is what I often console when dark thoughts come. – Yes indeed. Her and her husband's misery had turned for the better. She always had the children she loves above all things with her - she raised them healthy and happy. She herself is healthy with a lot of work - she does not fall into the eyes having written so many volumes (more than 90). Everyone loves her - not poor - charitable, instead of her daughter's wedding she gave 1000 francs. for the poor of their parish, as they say in our country. “Only sometimes he tells untruths, but that is allowed to a Romancier. – And so she asked me if I did not know about Méry - it struck me, I ask why - she twisted my answer and preferred that I should learn about his death again by chance as from her. Well, yesterday it happened that your wife, the son of the former proprieter of our last apartment, who in a few days will take Mamie a snuffbox from me for her name day - she told me about it by chance - thinking that I already knew. This is the 3rd this year. Antoś, Sobański Izydor, whom I loved very much, and that good man who was still writing from Rome. I am sending Ludwika a note from PS and Miss de Rozi?res. – Pour me refaire un peu [10] before the arrival of PS, I was at Albrecht's in the countryside in Ville d'Araye near Paris, near Versailles. My goddaughter is already a big girl, like Ludka, and very pretty. If any of you were leaving this year, maybe I would go to the Rhine. It's a pity that the factory keeps Tytus. Hug him. Marynie and Olesie amuse me. May God give them good things. – Today the 9th. I couldn't post this letter yesterday because I had a few more lessons to post that kept me going. My good students, you won't believe how polite. Yesterday, a young Rothschild woman sent me un verre d'eau, very pretty, with a gilded tray and spoon, a crystal chalice avec un pied en vermeille - ciselé et dans un charmant écrin [11] . – I do not have your works yet, but I thank you most sincerely in advance and I ask you not to spoil your eyes with such things. Stay healthy and loved as always. ""As much as I love you, I am completely healed now."" As much as I can, calm down, although I will admit to you that this marriage is not good with Sol, whom I have usually seen every day for 10 years and often acted as an intermediary between her and my mother, it made me a bit sad. I feel sorry for De Préaux, but he did a very good job and took it all so well that they can't say anything against him, only that he didn't want to. – As for my music, I am about to print my Cello Sonata – what Now. heard - the new Mazurkas too. – [Adding note:] Franchomme visits me every day and bows to Ludwika. Good Gavary, whom I saw yesterday, too. [Continuation of the letter:] Yesterday I posed again at Scheffer's, the portrait is coming. – Winterhalter also made a small pencil for my old friend Planat de la Faye (which I wrote to you once). - Really similar. Winterhalter you probably know by name, kind and good, and with great talent. Also Lehmann (whom you also need to know about) did my little portrait for Leon - but it all bore no resemblance to what Ludwika has by PS - PS wrote a new thing during my absence, it's now finished, titled Celio Floriani. I don't know, but she told me it was short and it was about drama. I don't know which journal it will come out in yet. – Lorca wrote to me a few times ago from Dresden, but I did not write back - as is my custom. A good creature is not surprised at anything. Because Ludw. curious about the details about PS's son-in-law - well: His father is a culptor in Besançon - known there, but nowhere else, through his work he has accumulated a certain fortune, which is made up of several houses in the city. There are plenty of children. As a young boy, he was taken under the care of Cardinal de Rohan - and he was supposed to be guided by a clergyman, but abandoned him in six months - he took up drawing and sculpture. - This is where the life of tenebra [12] begins - various unbeautiful things - as they drove him out of here, drove him out of there, and ends his Italian voyage, that he had to flee from debts from Florence. Father did not want to know about him, he joined the cuirassiers, he also stayed there for a short time. Two years ago he made a small statue, representing a small faun, which was well spoken of. This year, this woman and some very beautiful breasts, as well as Aguado's children, and he married Solange. No friends, no relationships. His father did not attend the wedding, but wrote a letter. PS she didn't see him, she only heard about him through her son, they only say about her mother that she always wears a shirt, no one has seen her. He had a younger brother with him, a 19-year-old boy who got a little drunk at one dinner, quarreled with Maurycy, and whom he sends away. This boy was just commissioning him. “Sam is 33 and Sol is 18. The difference seems too great to me. De Préaux was 25. - The first time Clésinger was presented here was a year ago by Mr. d'Arpentigny, an ex-captain, a witty, funny Frenchman who, having learned that Sol was to marry his presented one, wrote a letter to his mother (of which I know), to put it mildly, that he presented someone who has talent, but whose person he does not guarantee - and yes, he considers it his duty to enlighten his mother on this point, because he brought him into the house. – But PS n'a pas tenu compte de cela [13] . She wrote him a courtesy letter, and he hasn't set foot here since then, and told P. Marliani that he couldn't be asked to stay at home, where the son was adopted of the one about whom he had written so much evil with the best of his heart and with the most sincerity of his soul. and beliefs. These are all things the average company's cubit is measured. But since they don't usually care about the world here, they don't think about such things, and maybe it's better. - If you have a beautiful time, it's been cold here for several days now - and a lot of colds. They say that doctors have made it fashionable to go for a walk to the Champs Elysées after dinner, that is, around 8 o'clock, to catch a cold. – Indeed, now in the evening the rows of beautiful carriages in the Avenues Elysées filled with ladies in toilets can be seen instead of what was the case last year from 4 to 6. – You know, the ether invention has no general event so far that would cancel it. Paris, although summer, is not completely empty yet, because there are still chambers and many foreign ones. The opera is poor. Mrs. Stolz has already left the stage and is now making a sound in the provinces before she goes to the Rhine. Miss Lind is making a splash in London. “Mrs. Viardot is to be in Frankfurt now. They're expecting either one or the other here for the winter. – Miss Rachel (very beautiful in Atalia) also goes to the Netherlands for her vacation or rest. Duprez has no voice at the moment - maybe he will come back with a rest. Davida Colomb only moves one mast. – But what the Parisian audience is now interested in is the Hippodrome – where, in the open air (just like our Heca, only raised to the last power – Bartek can see that I know algebra), where old tournaments and races are staged in the most authentic costumes – the staff consists of several hundred horses and people. people addition. Now they are famously staging in costumes from the times of Francis I (Le Camp du Drap-d'or) a deceptive tournament - splendor of clothes - and women - and pages - and everything that you can put on. Never in the great Opera did they have richer costumes and armor [14]. They fall off the horse deliberately - they fight in ancient armor and throw themselves on their heads - each with a coat of arms equipped - the sun is reflected in all armor - the glare - the pulsation and clink of armor, in a word, a spectacle as special as possible. Each of these actors, whose role ends and begins with good clothes, thinks he is that duke, that cont, that prince whom he portrays. And these women think that they are indeed the ladies they fight for, or who cheer the victors with their beauty and qualities. – Greet my godfather and Elsner and everyone. Nowak, and thank him from me for bringing you everything. - I haven't given Wernik a few lessons yet, but I don't have much time, it's going to be done slowly and what's the use of it? - He tells me that he works according to what I told him and that he's doing better. - Pleyel was very sick with fever, he has now bought a property near Montmorency, and spends the summer there. – Every day, by train, he is in Paris at his factory from 12:00 to 5:00 – then he uses fresh air there. Today at 4 o'clock I have friends from Tours - (Forest) to whom I promised to play a sonata with Franchomme. – He reworked, as you know, my Sonata with a march for orchestra – and he brought me one notturno yesterday, under which he put the words O salutaris and which sings well. The doors do not close for me from various visitors, whom sometimes I cannot let go. ""I should have been rude a long time ago, but I'm not yet."" – I hug you cordially. I will write to you again soon. write me back. ""All the best to you mother."" The most attached Ch. I hug Ludwika and Izabela. This letter more to Ludwika, who knows the locals, how will you care - but I am addressing all of you and I know that you will keep some things for yourself. – I hug Antek and Kalasanty and the children. \r\n [1] Renseignements - information. [2] Mairie - the mayor's office, where the registry office is located. [3] Most indecent (from French indécent) – the most obscene. [4] Pour motiver sa pose – to motivate the pose. [5] Car c'est une femme... dans Paris – because she is a woman of easy driving, very famous in Paris. [6] Voluptic - lascivious. [7] Pour ne pas dire – not to say. [8] II est de cette force – it suits him; it's that kind of type. [9] Il est hardi... ambitieux - he is bold, educated, active and ambitious. [10] Pour me refaire un peu - to improve a bit. [11] Avec un pied... écrin - with a base made of gilded silver, carved, in a charming box. [12] Tenebrow - dark. [13] N'a pas tenu compte de cela - did not take this into account. [14] Armur (from French armure) - armor.[15] Une propriété - estate."
I, the undersigned, Fr. Chopin, residing in Paris at ul. st. Lazare No. 34, I confirm that I have sold pp. Breitkopf and Härtel, Leipzig, the following pieces of my composition, namely: Op. 63. Three Mazurkas for piano. op. 64. Three Waltzes for Piano. op. 65. Sonata for piano and cheetah. I certify that I have transferred my ownership rights to them without any reservations or restrictions for all times and for all countries except France and England and acknowledge receipt of the agreed fee, for which a separate receipt has been issued. F. Chopin.
"My dear Chopin! I'm sick; the stagecoach journey from Blois will tire me greatly. Will you lend me your carriage so that I may return to Paris? Please reply me immediately. In order to return, I await your reply at La Châtre, where I suffer discomfort. I left Nohant forever after the most horrible scenes from my mother. Please wait for me before leaving Paris, I am very anxious to see you at once. I was categorically denied your carriage. So, if the Lord wants me to use it, please write a word of permission that I will send to Nohant to have it taken. Adieu, see you soon, I hope. Solange. Please address Mr. Simonet at La Châtre."
 I was sorry to hear that you are ill. I hasten to place my carriage at your disposal. I wrote to my mother about it. Please save yourself. Mrs. old friend Ch.
It is not my business to tell you about Mr. C[lésinger]. Even my mind became accustomed to his name only from the moment when the Lady gave him her daughter. When it comes to her, she cannot be indifferent to me. You will remember that I interceded with her on behalf of her children without distinction, whenever I had the opportunity, being convinced that you were destined to love them always - for these are the only feelings that do not change. Misfortune may obscure it, but it cannot distort it. This misfortune is apparently very powerful, since it made the Lady's heart refuse to hear about her daughter, at a time when her future is being weighed, at a time when her physical condition requires maternal care more than ever. In view of an event so serious, which hurts your most sacred feelings, I will not mention what concerns me. Time will do its thing. I'll wait - always the same. Dedicated to Mrs. Ch. [Greetings] to Maurice.
 had ordered mail horses yesterday, and I was going, being very ill myself, to set off in the convertible despite the terrible weather. Your silence disturbed me to such an extent that I wanted to go to Paris for a day to inquire about your health. The Lord, meanwhile, has considered everything and His answer is very calm. So be it, dear friend, do what your heart tells you now - taking the voice of instinct for the voice of conscience. I understand it perfectly. As for my daughter, she is no more anxious than she was last year, and neither my zeal, nor my care, nor my orders, nor my threats, have been able to induce her to stop acting like one who wants to be ill. It does not behoove her to admit that she needs the love of a mother whom she detests, whom she slanders, whose most holy deeds and house she soils with vile words. The Lord is pleased to hear all this and may even believe it. I will not fight this kind of fight, it disgusts me. I would rather see the Lord take the side of the enemy than defend myself against the enemy that my womb has produced and which I have nursed with my own breast. So may the Lord take care of her, if in your opinion you ought to devote yourself to her. I will not hold it against you for this, but you will understand that I am encroaching on my role as an outraged mother, and that henceforth nothing will be able to induce me to relinquish this authority and this dignity. I've been deceived long enough, I've been a victim long enough. I forgive the Lord and in the future I will not reproach Him again because His confession is sincere. It surprises me a bit, but if this is how you feel freer and more comfortable, I will not be sorry for this strange change of front. God bless you my friend, may the Lord heal you quickly of all your ailments, I trust it will now (I have my reasons), and I will thank God for this bizarre ending in the name of nine years of exclusive friendship. Please send me some messages about yourself. It would be futile to return to other matters. GS
" was just writing to thank you for the visit of the clerk, Mr. Bouzemond, and to ask for news, when I received your good letter. It has strengthened me more than a bottle of Molin, for here I am ready to be taken by Mr. Rothschild to his estate in Ferri?re for a few days. – Poor Enrico died 3 days ago in a mental institution (Mrs. Marl[iani] rented her apartment and lived in a hotel). He begins to feel the lack of kind Enrico. Yesterday she came to visit me and told me that she was surprised that she had not received a reply from Nohant to her last letter. (She had to ask, as usual, some inappropriate questions.) Nobody has a message; neither Grzym., nor Delacroix, who sincerely regrets not having seen you, nor Mademoiselle de R[ozi?res], to whom I announced your letter. He thinks soon to begin his lectures at Chaillot. I have already begun my lessons, and one is even waiting for me to finish this page, which I would like to fill with all sorts of good news, but since there are none, I put down my pen and wish you both every possible prosperity, thanking you with all my soul for your good words . My old friendship forever and ever. Ch. Shake my husband's hand for me, and improve my French as before."
X-woman Marcellina came for a few weeks. The 10th, the rest still in Dieppe. I am equally weak, I can't find a place to live. Come if you can. I hope you're well. It's starting to get ugly out here. Write a word if you don't come. Yours until death Ch.
"Thank you very much for the good news. The sachet is already with me, and I have informed Mademoiselle de R[ozi?res] that you will write to her. I entered Lafitte et Cie's courtyard through one gate the day you left the other; it was very simple, I had a seven on the carriage. That is why I did not reply to you immediately yesterday, the 17th, so that my letter would still find you in Besançon. So you will be visiting the beautiful Franche-Comté; please do not forget me in your travels, so that I know where to write to you. My Swede has left me and I can't follow him to Stockholm. Still no news. May your health continue to serve you. Please allow me to shake your hand cordially; I combine the best wishes for you and your husband. Ch."
"Madame Emilia de Girardin has instructed me to ask you to come tomorrow evening no later than 8 and a half went to a sleepwalker who goes into ecstasy under the influence of music; she lives on the ground floor at 80 rue de Chaillot, Champs Elysées; you will have peace there, a good armchair, you will meet my daughter and Miss de la Rue. It will not tire you, and I am assured you will be delighted. I wish, my beloved Sylph, that I will not be there myself, but I have given up all but the Lord, whom I love and will love until death. C. de Courbonne. Don't be afraid of people, there will be very few of them."
" have not written to you for a long time, my Chopin, but for many days our heads were occupied only with nasty money matters. For a moment we thought we were lost. It was not possible to take out a loan in any way, and you had to have 8,000 francs. to pay tomorrow's bills in Paris. At the same time, no way to get money in time, even despite the father's credit, which was just getting out of his skin. Finally, by a truly providential accident, I found Cave shares in my briefcase and we received 9,000 francs for them. from Luxembourg. You will admit, it seems that my patron got involved and placed in my wallet papers that I considered worthless and left in Paris. They probably would have arrested the whole shack in Paris. What would be our situation four months after the wedding, with names like ours. – By the way, Mr. Bouzemond will personally return the 500 francs to you. “You yourself know too well the value of the favor you have rendered me for me to try to remind you of it. Without the Lord, we would already be in a predicament. It was the first time I had seen these things up close, and I must admit I was terrified. Now that I've had some experience with these kinds of things, they don't impress me that much anymore. Please note that you are always punished by what you have sinned. For example, I, with my taste for luxury, I, who thought that a six-horse carriage was hardly worthy to carry me, I, who thought that my life would pass among delusions and poetic dreams, surrounded by clouds and flowers, am more prosaic today, more downcast than the most mundane creature. I'm sure I'll become stingy, I who would throw millions out the window. I have aged more in a week than in 18 previous years; and I think there are few women of my age, brought up as I am, who would endure such hard trials as calmly as I do. On the one hand, money concerns, on the other, my mother, who had left me suddenly, though I had no life experience, and my father, rather hard than loving, a father who could not be tender; here's what doesn't happen every day to 19-year-old girls. I had to turn to my husband's family, and there, with parents who didn't raise me, who don't know me, I find love and tenderness. Life is hard work, as the peasants say. Fortunately, I have my sculptor who consoles me in everything, who replaces everything for me. But long enough, my good Chopin, I have bored you with my troubles. I will leave you alone, sending you the most cordial handshake possible. Clésinger joins him and knows how to appreciate the old friendship you have for me. I also now feel what it means to have a friend in life, especially when he is the only one. My mother, the first best friend whom Providence gave me, leaves me in the care of all the saints, and she does not know if there is even one who deigns to look after me. Adieu. Please, write a few words about your health and about everything that might interest me. I am going to write to Mademoiselle de Rozi?res to tell her what beauty I have seen in Besançon."
Dear friend. Thank you for your good heart - but I'm very rich tonight. With all my heart your Ch.
" My dear Chopin. Iza has been in bed since Friday evening; I'm anxious because she has a runny nose so strong and stubborn it looks like mild pneumonia. Adieu, my dear Chopin, we will not be able to see you today. I hope this foul weather is not having a negative effect on your health. How sad in the world!"
 Please send me a copy of my Cello Sonata [...] [transl./transl. NIFC]
 received your letter with pleasure and read it with sadness. What do all these rumors mean? Your husband has never borrowed any more money from me to pay for your furniture. The lady sent me 500 francs. just after arriving in Besançon. I also found the 5 louis in my purse, and I have constantly forgotten to thank you for the gentle way in which you repay larger sums to your creditors. May you be happy. Dedicated to Mrs. Ch. Husband [bows].
" A very dear friend. The Countess de Perthuis will gladly sacrifice her next Monday. So since it is more convenient for the Lord, instead of Tuesday I expect the day after tomorrow, Monday the 18th - about 8?. It will be a real pleasure to see Mrs. Léo and Miss Faustina at my place; I'd also be delighted if Mrs. Valentin and Lehmann had nothing better to do this evening. Please invite them on my behalf. Completely surrendered and intoxicated. Ch."
"[...] Your indignation against writers seems to match mine - they are a wretched bunch. They claim to be priests of a temple of which they would not even be worthy guardians, and make no mistake, everything in this world is in harmony: pomposity is always an inseparable companion of emptiness. Yesterday I saw the opera of the famous Merdi, of whom that young German musician whom I met at your place spoke so enthusiastically; Verdi or Merdi are making a splash today; in fact, he repeats over and over all that remains of Rossini, but without his genius: nothing but noise. They will ask your opinion, discuss it in your presence - you will have to go to it whether you want to or not, but you will go without me, I swear. All the time I thought of your poor Lady Viardot, whose inescapable destiny will be, if she wants to live, to sing forever the music of these wretches. Where is Chopin, where is Mozart, where are the priests of the living God, where are you? [...] Prepare poor Chopin for finding this unpleasant music here, adieu, adieu."
"For the past 15 days, I have been writing to you every morning to express how much I regret the outcome of your two visits to Nohant. However, the first step is taken: you showed heart and there has already been a certain rapprochement, because you were asked to write. Time will do the rest. You know very well that you should not take what is said literally, you could stop knowing a stranger, such as me, but your husband, who is a family member, cannot meet this. Yesterday I saw Miss de R. who told me that Mrs. Bascans had news from you but had not yet heard from Nohant. Mrs. Bascans is in bed with a fever and a runny nose. All Paris is sick; the weather is terrible and you are doing well to spend time under a beautiful sky. Let health and good mood serve there. I will try to send news more serene than the climate here; but this awful year needs to end. In addition, he deprives Grzymała of all his fortune. He just lost everything in an unfortunate trading deal. Delacroix, who was with me, asked you to express his regret that he had not had the opportunity to meet you. Bignat didn't come. Ms. Marliani is legally separated. Here's some news. An article by your mother about the story of Louis Blanc appeared in ""Si?cle"". That's it. I'm suffocating, I have a headache, so I apologize to you for my corrections and French. I am asking for a cordial handshake from you and your husband. May God protect you. Devoted to Mrs. Chopin. Please give me a sign of life. Next time I will write better and more."
"After receiving the mail, I went immediately to the lady's husband to give him the letter; he was on guard at the Tuileries. I did not see him until late in the evening, at 7 o'clock, to eat dinner. He told me that he wrote to you the same day, and that he was going to Guillery that same day, which would do you both good. So glad you don't have the flu. All of Paris is coughing. I'm suffocating and expecting cholera. Ludwika writes to me that she is approaching the gates of Warsaw and that no one is afraid of her. Mrs. Bascans is doing better, you have probably already received a message from her. Miss de Rozi?res will also write. Falempin had sent for the keys to the apartment in the Square. I hope that your correspondence with Nohant will make all of you calm. With God's help, everything will be fine. Madame Maréchal sent to me to hear news from Berry; I had them say that they are all well and that I am going to Elysée these days. Indeed, it is hard for me to decide to take the sad news to the good Madame Maréchal. Besides, I move so little; I only occasionally visit Grzym, which doesn't go out at all. The Duchess does not leave the chaise longue like two years ago. Wenta is coming, but it doesn't look great. There's no prom. Delacroix visited me. Arago is nowhere to be seen. Mrs. Marliani, who has moved again (she now lives on rue Godot), told me that she had recently had some comforting news from Nohant; they admit she's right. She is deplorable. She had completely forgotten about Enrico. Oh, stupid news! but now I have nothing cheerful to communicate to you except the news of the imminent arrival of her husband to Guillery and the good letter from Nohant. May God protect you. Devoted to her Ch."
"Dear Mr Błotnicki! I am waiting for you on the day from 2 to 6; although I will have a lesson, I will take it. Just please tell me downstairs that I'm waiting for you. Good bye Ch."
" Dearest. \r\n I was thinking of you when I promised Mrs. Gangler I'd be waiting for her at my place - so be there before 5. As for Mrs. Lasserve, I can give her a choice of either Thursday at 10 a.m. or Sunday noon. I'll try to pay my respects to her on Thursday if I can. I am sending you etudes - I would have come to you if it wasn't for the rain. ""My respects to your Lady."" Ch. Kiss the children."
" Dear friend. If Mrs. Franchomme would like to give us the pleasure of spending an evening with us, I should be delighted to see Mrs. Lasserve among us. If you can, try for it. ""I'm waiting for you with dinner at a quarter to six."" Your totally devoted Ch."
"One of the old, started, unburned letters. Dearest children! I didn't reply right away because I'm very busy. Besides, M. de Rozi?res probably wrote back to Louise at once that I was in good health and employed to the hilt. Thank you very much for the godfather's breast. He has a more brilliant physiognomy, but probably what he did, the Ordinary, and involuntarily left his mark. I sent you through the chamberlain Walewski a little Lady's Companion for Ludwika from my good Scotswoman, and now I have sent New Year's engravings by the usual way. Gavard gave me his engravings for Ludwika (half of which I had not sent back a long time ago and are waiting for the occasion). Sam when I bring. Let Ludwika thank him if she wants to. Besides, there is the Bosphore, Histoire de Paris for Louise; Ireland, Rome and La France for Iza Bale; Paul et Virginie for little Ludka. Les gentilhommes and Les madeleines for Kalasanty, and Les professeurs for Bartek, to laugh at. I spent Christmas Eve the other day in the most prosaic way, but I was thinking about you. Best wishes for you every year. Lorca is here; I see her often. She's getting old, you'd better find her now. He's leaving for Dresden this week. I am pleased to talk about you with her, she loves you most sincerely. I met X. Michałowa's daughter and her husband as well. I teach Mrs. Calergis; in fact, he plays very beautifully and has a great success in the great Parisian world by all means. Sol is with his father in Gascony. She saw her mother passing by. She was in Nohant with the Duvernets, but her mother received her coldly and said that if she separated from her husband, she would be able to return to Nohant. She saw her nuptial room turned into a theatre, her boudoir turned into an actors' dressing room, and she writes to me that her mother spoke only of money interests. The brother was playing with her dog and all he could tell her was: Veux-tu manger quelque chose! [1] Neither the cousin nor those others were visible, in short, two visits came to nothing, because the next day, when she was leaving, she returned, but she was received even colder. However, her mother told her to write to her, which she was to do. Now the mother seems to be more angry with the son-in-law than with the daughter, and in her famous letter she wrote to me that the son-in-law is quite good, only the daughter makes him so. One might think that at first she wanted to get rid of her daughter and me because we were inconvenient to her; he will be in correspondence with his daughter, so the maternal heart, which cannot do without information about the child, will in the meantime satisfy and suffocate conscience. She will think that she is just, and will declare me an enemy, supposedly because I took the side of my son-in-law (whom I do not tolerate, only because he married her daughter, and from whose marriage I defended as much as I could). ""Strange creature with all its brains!"" Some madness attacked: furrows in his life, furrows in his daughter's life; If it ends badly with my son, I foretell it and sign it. For her own excusation, she would like to find something for those who wish her well, who believed her, who have never done anything rude to her, and whom she cannot see around her, because they are the mirror of conscience. So she didn't write a word to me again, so she won't come to Paris this winter, so she didn't say a word about me to her daughter. I do not regret that I helped her endure the most delicate eight years of her life, when the daughter was growing up and the son was being brought up with his mother; I do not regret everything I have bitten, but I do regret that my daughter, this well-kept plant, preserved from so many winds in her maternal hand, was broken by imprudence and lightness, which may pass for a twenty-year-old woman, but not a forty-year-old woman. What was and isn't is not recorded in the register. Mrs. S. cannot have for me only a good memory in her soul, when she looks back one day. Meanwhile, she is in the strangest paroxysm of a mother playing the role of a better and more just mother, as she is in fact herself; and this is a fever for which there is no medicine in the head with such an imagination when they set out on a quagmire field. After all, ""after all, even cypresses have their whims."" “The winter here is not very long. There's a lot of flu, but I've had enough of my usual grunting and I'm not afraid of flu like you are. I sometimes smell my homeopathic bottles, I give a lot of lessons at home and as much as I can, I stick to it. – I want to write to you every day and this letter, started last year, ends on January 6, 1848. Yesterday Lorca went to Dresden. Her half-sister goes after Olizar. Before boarding the train, we had lunch together with Mrs. Ryszczewska, whom I also like very much. It's all older and better than when it was too young. I don't know what he wrote to you that the good father of Wojciech [Grzymała] suffered great financial losses and had great troubles, and will still have, because a man who had his trust, whose habileté [2] was known and appreciated by all the bankers and people who advised him du métier [3], failed him and ran away. It's all being explained slowly; he is as pure as amber and suffers first, and those who had shares in the same enterprise incur less losses than they initially thought. This entreprise is an entrepôt by the railway du Nord [4] . There, goods are deposited, which are then dispatched to the left and to the right. Pure and good business, only his gentleman, who ruled there the most, illegally signed the sums, to which he was not entitled to pay the contestation [5] and had to flee and leave all the troubles on the head of our good Wojciech, who after all had already partly unraveled, but not yet completely. I am writing this to you so that the bad news does not reach you, because there are many charitables [6] in the world. - In ""Debates"" a new novel by P. S. (in the country Beryshon type, like Mara) comes out, which begins beautifully; his name is François Le Champi. Champi are called bastards in the villages, and they are usually given to poor women to raise, and the hospitals pay them for it. They also talk about her memoirs, but in a letter to Mrs. Marliani, Ms. S. wrote that these would be more of her previous thoughts on art, literature, etc., and not what they usually understand by memoirs. Indeed, it is too early for that, for dear P. S. there will be many strange twists and turns in her life before she grows old; many beautiful and many ugly things will happen. – Mrs. Obreskow is here and she tells me a lot about Mameczka how many times we are together, and I promised her to have dinner once a week. [1] Veux-tu... chose - Do you want to eat something. [2] Habileté – dexterity, ability. [3] People du métier – professionals. [4] Entrepôt... du Nord - depot, warehouse... north. [5] Contestation - due. [6] Charitable – charitable; here ironically: obliging."
" sincerely thank you for remembering. I don't think I need to express all my wishes for happiness in the coming year. I immediately took your letter to her husband, who said that he would leave for you tomorrow. He was very busy with his sculptures for the exhibition, which prevented him from leaving Paris earlier. Mr. de Larac had been terminated at No. 3 and Maurice's, which led him to believe that my compatriot - if he was a compatriot - had a good idea. If everyone was happy. I believe that slowly everything will work out, that soon instead of 9 you will receive 90 lines and that the happiness of your grandmother will also be the happiness of your young mother. You will both adore the little angel who will come into the world to bring order to your hearts. Here is the program for 1848. A new novel called François le Champi is due to start appearing in Debats these days. Hetzel also vaguely announces in small writings something like Diaries. “Mrs. Marliani had news about it, and she told me that the book would be about literature and the arts. A certain capitalist, Mr. Latouche (I believe), will provide money to Hetzel, who will only be a publisher. I gave Miss de Rozi?res my regards, you are to write to her if you haven't already done so. I'm coughing and lessons are completely absorbing me. It's cold, I don't go out much because it's too cold for me. Take care of yourself and come back soon both of you in good health. The year starts rather noisy: the national guard gave its usual serenade in the squares. I arranged errands for my goddaughter at the Hôtel Lambert; by yesterday, the event brought about 20,000 francs. There were many beautiful things there. Your husband sent a small watercolor, which sold very well. Delacroix painted a baby Christ, everyone raves about him. Gudin, Lehmann and others also contributed their drawings. I can't see anything anymore, it's snowing, it's getting dark. Miss Adélaide has died, there will be a great mourning for 2 months. I'm suffocating - I wish you the best of luck. Devoted Ch."
Dear doctor. Everything is ready to leave tomorrow night. – I do not want to leave Paris without seeing the Lord and receiving His directions. So please, kindly give me a moment of time when the Lord visits the sick today. Devoted to Mr. Chopin. Will you also please help my memory, for my notebook is even more capricious than myself (if that's possible).
" My life. I'm very tired, and I won't be able to see Miss Dorville today. Please tell the Hotel about it. - How are you? Despite various promises , I do not know who yet . ""He was weak again for a few days, but I saw him yesterday, and he's fine."" The bile bothers him. – I hug you warmly. Ch."
Dear and beloved Mr. Norblin. Mr. Feliks Lipiński, brother of the famous violinist Karol, himself also a violinist, came to Paris from Lvov and as a Polish artist he cannot be in Paris and not know you. - I seize this opportunity to send Polish porridge - and I expect that we will embrace each other soon. Tout ? vous de coeur F. Chopin.
 The most beautiful places left for Mrs. D[orva]l, but not for her cook.
"My life! As for your books: Versailles Gallery given by Gavard to Louisa. Beginning long ago, from 6 months, was to go by chance and returned, lies with me; and what has now been sent, what has gone forth, I do not know how much. Don't look a gift horse in the mouth. Gavard gave it to me packed before he saw it, and I sent it through my regular bookseller, and at first I didn't send it, because it was neither packed nor a little soiled from being smashed around the cupboard. I will never send you books because of this fool, when Spies died. As for the rest, it is exacte [1]. I didn't have time to sign the Bosphorus for you, Ludwika. I don't have time to ask Gavard what was missing, what wasn't there, and Franck, through whom it went, cannot know, because I gave him the package as Gavard sent me. You would have to ask Gavard, and he his journeyman, etc., which is not worth it, especially since it is given. But if it is absolutely necessary, then in the next letter. [The words from ""It would be"" to ""leaves"" are crossed out, instead Chopin added in a postscript to the space marked with an asterisk: ""Gavard came and wrote a note.""] As for me, I am as well as I can be. Pleyel, Perthuis, Léo, Albrecht persuaded me to go to the concert. There's been no room for a week. I will give it to the Pleyel salon on the 16th of this month. Only 300 tickets for 20 fr. I will have a beautiful Parisian world. The king ordered 10, the queen 10, the Duchess of Orléans 10, Fr. Montpensier 10, although mourning and none of them will be. They're signing up for a second one, which I probably won't give because this one is already boring me. – PS always stays in the country with Borio, with his son, with Lambert and Augustyna, who is said to be married to some professor of drawing from the small town of Tulle, and a friend of Bori's, probably now. She never wrote a word to me, nor did I. She ordered the local landlord to rent the apartment. Sol is with Dudevant's father in Gascony, writing to me. Her husband is here; for the exhibition, which is in March, the marbles are finishing. Sol was sick with her father. They have no money, so Sol better spend the winter in a beautiful climate. But the poor thing is bored. Lune de miel is beautiful! [2] Meanwhile, Mother writes a very beautiful column in ""Debates"". She plays country comedies in her daughter's nuptial room, forgets herself, stupefies herself as best she can, and won't wake up until her heart, which is now crushed by her head, aches terribly. I made my cross. May the Lord God love her if she cannot distinguish between true affection and flattery. Besides, perhaps others seem to me to be flatterers, or perhaps her happiness is true where I do not see it. Her friends and neighbors had long misunderstood anything that had happened there recently, but now perhaps they had gotten used to it. Besides, no one will ever be able to follow the whims of such a soul. Eight years of some order was too much. God granted that these were the years when the children were growing up, and if it wasn't for me, I don't know how long they would have been with their father, not with her. And Maurycy will run away to his father at the first opportunity. But maybe these are also the conditions of her life, her writing talent, her happiness? Don't let it bother you, because it's been a long time. Time great doctor. So far I am still not mine. That's why I don't write to you, because what I start, I smoke. So much to write! or better nothing; only that we haven't seen each other for a long time, without any battles or scenes, and that I couldn't go there having kept silent about my daughter as a condition. The daughter, going to her father, saw her mother, who received her coldly; she didn't want to see her son-in-law, but she has a dry correspondence with her daughter, which makes me happy, because at least something will remain between mother and daughter. [Add.] I am sending this letter to let you know that I am healthy and the truth about books. I am sending a letter to De Rozi?res. \r\n [1] Exacte - that's right. [2] Lune de miel – honeymoon months."
"To all my loved ones. Dearest. I haven't written to you for a long time, because it's like this: the more late you are, the more things to write - and so much, so much that it ends with nothing. So today I am writing to you only a few words, so that you may know that I am well, that I have received your letter. I had a grippa like the whole world here - and if I'm writing to you briefly today, it's because I'm busy with my concert, which is to be on the 16th of this month. My friends came one morning and told me that I had to give a concert, that I should not worry about anything but sit down and play. – There are no more tickets for a week, and all tickets are 20 fr. The audience signs up for the second (which I'm not thinking of). The court demanded 40 tickets and the diaries only said that I might give a concert, and from Brest, from Nantes, my editor was written to book seats. I am surprised by such an empressement [1] and I have to play today at least for my conscience, because it seems to me that I play worse than ever. I will play (for curiosity) the Mozart Trio with Franchomme and Allard. There will be no posters or free tickets. The salon is comfortably furnished and can accommodate 300 people. Pleyel always jokes about my stupidity and will decorate the stairs with flowers to encourage the concert. I will be at home and almost only familiar faces will meet my eyes. I already have a piano that I play. Yesterday I signed and had a very beautiful Pleyel piano packed for Mrs. Adam Potocka (née Branicka) to Krakow. I got, I don't know by whom, finally your quilt, which is admired by people who have seen it. Thank you, my dearest. It's cold here, and the frosts have stopped here, but there was a time when the Seine froze. Wernik works very well and tell that to your mother. Nowakowski wrote to me, but I have nothing to write back to him. I give a lot of lessons. I am very much employed in all directions, and I do nothing at the same time. Jasio wrote me a kind letter; she asks a lot about Antek Bartol. He went through a good school of poverty, he went through that necessary alembic to look human, and I would like to see him here. If he leaves, I will move too, because I doubt that I will spend next summer like this year in Paris. If God gives us health, we will see each other and talk and hug each other. More after the show. Méry is no longer there to write for you. I embrace you most sincerely. Ch. everyone. [1] Empressment - zeal."
"Dear and honorable master. I deeply regret that I was not at home when the Lord did me the honor of coming to see me. Today I am asking the Lord. I was introduced to Miss Merli, an 8-year-old Italian girl, a blind pianist; In my opinion, he is truly a wonderful talent and genius. Would the Lord be kind enough to take her home? Of course, only after your concert, because until then you are probably too busy for me to take even a moment from you. – I would very much like to give this young and interesting person the pleasure of hearing the Lord; and since she is not wealthy, if the Lord could provide me with two tickets to his concert, for her and for her mother, it would be a good deed with which you would oblige me infinitely. Kindly accept, dear and distinguished master, expressions of best affection from the very devoted Meyerbeer."
" beg you, my Life, if you are at the Hotel today, make me apologize to Miss Dorville for not being able to give lessons today, for I am in unbearable pain - and I will have to take on one other student, whom I left on Tuesday anyway. Grz[ymała] - weak, until the doctor had to be consulted; very worried and rebellious - I don't know who yet - but maybe today - we'll talk in a moment. I couldn't see him yesterday - but today I think. – I hug you warmly. Ch."
Since your letter, I have been in bed for several days with a terrible flu and gave a concert at Pleyel's. During that time, I wrote thirty drafts to you, and I even finished one letter when last week your husband came to me with news about you. The letter had to be redone to tell you that I had found her husband in good health and happy with his sculptures, and how worried I was about your bad jaundice. Soon you will have your husband with you, which will speed up your recovery. Your husband will tell you all the news here better than I could describe. Leroux is in Paris. I met him at Mrs. Marliani's. He asked if he could visit me, was polite in advance, and said nothing about the village. Mr. de Bonnehose is here. Rom. lying in bed. All Paris is sick, so you do well to stay at Guillery. Please, write a word to me in pencil in your free time, I will not wait so long with the answer, now that I have the flu and my concert behind me. Maurice is in Paris. He does not live here. He came to see Larac, but he didn't come upstairs to see me. Poor boy, he unnecessarily started gossip around the house. Miss de Rozi?res must have written to you. I'm finishing my epistle because lessons are about to start. It would be superfluous to tell you how unhappy they feel not being able to write to you constantly and easily. Very devoted Ch.
 can't help but write to you immediately how happy I am to hear that you have become a mother and that you are doing well. The birth of your little girl gave me more joy than the birth of the Republic. Thank God your suffering is over. A new world begins for you. I wish you luck. Take care of yourselves everyone. I really needed good news from you. I was in bed during the accidents. I've had neuralgia for the past week. Paris is calm with fear. Everyone is united. They all belong to the national guard. Shops open, no buyers. Foreigners with their passports are waiting for the broken railway lines to be repaired. Clubs are starting to form. I would not finish if I wanted to describe to you everything that is going on here. Thanks again for the good letter. Totally devoted to you Ch. Mallefille rules Versailles! That Louis Blanc is at the Medici Palace as chairman of the work organization committee (the biggest news of the day) is simple. Barb?s rules the Luxembourg Palace. Please forgive my deletions and inkblots. “Miss de Rozi?res will write to you.
"Yesterday I went to Mrs. Marliani's, and on my way out I met at the door of the hall your mother entering with Lambert. I said good morning to your mother, and then I asked if she had heard from you for a long time. ""A week ago,"" she replied to me. – “Didn't you have a letter yesterday, the day before yesterday?” - ""NO."" – “In that case, I am telling you that you have become a grandmother; Solange has a daughter and I'm glad to be the first to tell you the news."" I bowed and went downstairs. Combes the Abyssinian (who, having come from Morocco, fell into the revolution) accompanied me, and since I forgot to say that you are healthy, a very important thing, especially for your mother (now you will understand that easily, Mother Solange), I asked Combes to come back upstairs, because I could not climb the stairs again by myself; and he said that you and the baby are healthy. I was waiting downstairs for the Abyssinian when your mother came down at the same time as him and inquired with great interest about your health. I replied that you yourself had written a few words to me in pencil the day after the birth of your child, that you had suffered greatly, but when you saw your daughter, you forgot everything. She asked me if your husband was with you, to which I replied that the address of your letter seemed to me to be written in his hand. She also asked about my health, I said I was fine and told the porter to open the door. I bowed and went to Square d'Orléans; the Abyssinian led me away. The Lady's mother has been here for several days, as Boccage said to Grzym. He lives with Maurycy at ul. Condé No. 8, near Luxembourg. Eats at Pinson's (a restaurant Delatouch and I went to once); there she receives, there she ordered Combes to come, announcing her imminent departure to Nohant. I suppose a letter from you is waiting for her in Nohant. Her health seemed good to me. I think she is happy that the republican ideas have triumphed, and the news I communicated yesterday has added to her happiness. Please take care of yourself, take care of each other. Dedicated to Mrs. Ch. There is still peace. Mallefille is no longer at Versailles; only ruled for 3 days."
"My dear Chopin. I received a letter this morning in which the Lord writes to me about my mother. Ah, if it is true that she seemed interested in my health, may the Lord inform her of my misfortune. If he is still in Paris, let him know how much I suffer and how much I need consolation. Clésinger cannot leave Paris. It is enough that the mansion of Narbonne has been seized by my mother's creditors. I write to him every day to encourage him and make him stay. “But what I am asking you for may be quite unnecessary. She won't move. She'd be here by now if she loved me a little. My God, how can you be so insensitive! I, who myself had a daughter and who lost her so early, cannot understand her. It's so terrible and so cruel not to be a mother anymore. But she doesn't know that. May God preserve her that she may soon find out. Pastoure the female dog has been howling outside my window all evening since my daughter was born. She started howling again hours before her death. Last night she came howling furiously at my door again. Need one more victim?! Poor, poor Clésinger. Words of friendship for the good Grzymała, because I suppose it is about him. He thinks he is very unhappy; he is wrong, he did not lose the child. May God keep his son. Adieu, may the Lord write to me. Solange. Please try to see Clésinger and encourage him."
"Courage and peace. Please take care of yourself for those left behind. I saw your husband, he is healthy, brave and full of hope. Yesterday and the day before I saw him working on a bust of Liberty; the bust is finished today and all the Thor?ses of Paris think it is splendid. It will be moved to City Hall tomorrow. Marrast became the mayor of Paris (p. Bascans will be useful). Your husband knows M. Caussidi?re, who is in charge of the police and has the national guard transporting the bust. He asked me to inform you that he is too busy today to be able to write to you, but he will write to you tomorrow after the bust has been transported, which will be at 7. So, be calm about his health. You see that he is doing what he can, that he is brave, so try to recover your health so as to make your separation bearable for both of you. Peace, therefore, through pity, peace, and thanks to the protection of your father and Lucia (I have always believed that this good Lucy is very attached to you), your health will return and new happiness will begin. I was told that your mother left Paris. I haven't seen her since I left Mrs. Marliani's. You received the letters in Nohant. She is very worthy of sympathy, it is a heavy blow to her, I am sure, and I have no doubt that she will do everything in her power for you. So be courageous and calm. I leave aside all expressions of sympathy, they seem like nothing in the face of great suffering. Dedicated to Mrs. Ch. I will write to you often. May you be at peace with your husband."
"At that moment I received your letter, and I immediately sent to her husband's studio to find out if he had already left. He must be with you now, for he left Paris the day before yesterday; you will tell me everything you want to know about the situation in Paris. For now, there is silence, and the disorganization proceeds peacefully. I am happy that your mother wrote you such cordial letters. Now take care of your health and everything will go as well as possible. Take advantage of the sun's rays in the south because the weather here is terrible. Dedicated to Mrs. Ch. Husband [greetings]."
" [...] Chopin is very modest, he is afraid that people will try to profit from his name (at least I think so); advertising scares him. May the Lord watch over him on this point: he could not find better advice than from the Lord; [...] and if it is necessary for any newspaper to write about him, let it be one such as your [...]"
"My baby. Accept as my father, older brother, therefore better, dear Herbaut, who was my first acquaintance in Paris, when I came here from home. I implore you at the Lyceum, be with him, as he is worth it, as kindly as possible. He is worthy and enlightened and good and everything, and he will love you despite your baldness. You are a tetryk, a beast, you have not given me a kind word in any of your letters; but it doesn't matter, somewhere in your soul you love me, just like I love you. And maybe now even more, because we are both greater Polish orphans, Wodziński, Witwicki, Platery, and Sobański. You are good old Julian, and it's even. I embrace you cordially, my dear. Ch. If you want to do well, keep quiet and come back only when something is definitely going on with us. Our people gather in Poznań. Czartoryski was the first to go there, but God knows which way everything will go, so that Poland would be again... What the local newspapers write, lies. Neither the republic in Krakow nor the Austrian emperor called himself the Polish king, and in the Lviv newspapers in the address to the Stadium they do not ask the emperor for it at all, as quoted here. The Prussian king is also not very concerned about detaching Poznański; he made a fool of himself at home, but Poznański's Germans nevertheless write him an address that ""because this land was acquired by the blood of their fathers, they do not even know Polish, so they declare that they do not want to be under any other government than Prussian"". That's all, you see that war smells, and where it will start is not to know. But when it starts, all of Germany will take care of it, Italy has already started. Milan has expelled the Austrians, but they are still in the provinces and will fight. Surely France will help, because a certain mob must be pushed out of here in order to do the right thing... Muscovites will probably have trouble at home if they go against the Prussians a bit. The peasants of Galicia set an example for those in Volhynia and Podolia, there will be some terrible things, but at the end of it all there is Poland, great, big, in a word: Poland. So, despite our impatience, let us wait until the cards are mixed up well, so as not to waste strength in vain, so needed at the right moment. This moment is near, but not today. Maybe in a month, maybe in a year. Everyone here is convinced that our things will be desinfected [1] completely before autumn. Your old man [Teofil Kwiatkowski's note] [1] They will desyn (Fr. dessiner) - here: they will explain."
" crossed the sea without great illness. But not with ""Kurier"" or my new wagon acquaintances, because you had to look for a ship in the boat at sea. So I preferred the ordinary road, and yesterday I came here at 6 o'clock, for in Folkston I had to rest for a few hours. I fell asleep and am writing to you. The good-natured Erskins thought of everything, even chocolate, not only about the apartment, which I will change, because since yesterday there is a better one on their street for 4 gw. for a week. I live at 10, Bentinck Street, Cavendish Square, but I'm moving in a few days, so write to them at 44, Welbeck Street. They asked a lot about you. You won't believe how good it is; only now do I see that the paper on which I write is with my number, and I found a lot of such small delicacies. I'm going today, because it's Good Friday, and there's nothing to do here; I am going to those surrounding the former king who live outside the city. How did you get home? Have you not witnessed a battle on the road? Were you successful yesterday with the army? Please write and God bless you. Your old Ch."
My life. If you haven't delivered my letter to the post office yet, don't give it back - because I'm picking up a different address at the moment. Your Ch. My coffee is always waiting for you.
" Dearest. I'm already installed. I finally have a room - nice and big - where I can breathe and play - and the sun visited me today for the first time. I'm less suffocating this morning, but I've been useless all last week. - How are you? what is your wife and lovely children doing? You're finally starting to regain your composure, aren't you? I'm not doing anything yet. ""I've had some dull appointments - I haven't delivered my letters of recommendation yet."" I'm wasting my time on nothing - that's what. I love you and again. Yours with all my heart Ch. Kind regards to Mrs Fr[anchomme]. Write to me, I will also write to you."
"Dearest Life. I'm back from the Italian theater. J. Lind sang for the first time this year and the Queen appeared to the public for the first time after the chartists. Both had a great effect - and even old Wellington under the Queen's box, who sat like an old monarch dog in a kennel under his crowned Mistress. ""I met J. Lind,"" and she very politely sent me the finest steel with her card. He sat well, so he heard well. She is an original Swede, not in ordinary light - but in some aurora borealis. A huge effect in Somnambula does. She sings with clarity and certainty, and her piano is so steady - and even as a hair. [Addendum to starred:] Steel costs 2 gw. and ?."
"My dear. Not even laziness, just wasted time for nothing, the reason that you had nothing from me. I can't get out of bed before eight. My Italian, who takes care of himself and his bills, wastes my time in the morning, and after 10 o'clock tributaries begin, which do not bring money, and around 1 o'clock a few lessons. I can neither walk nor move much, so I don't care about my business, but I can see that things are getting done somehow and if season [1] lasted 6 months, I would earn some money. I don't know anything yet. The day after tomorrow the Duchess of Sutherland will present me to the Queen. The Queen will be with her in gratiam [2] baptism. If the Queen likes it and Prince Albert, who know about me, then it will be good, because I will start in advance. The philharmonic was offered to me to play, but I don't want to, because it's with an orchestra. I was there, I watched. Prudent played his concert, he made a fiasco. You have to play Mozart, Beethoven or Mendelssohn there, and although the directors and others tell me that my concerts have already been played there and with effect, I prefer not to, because nothing can be. An orchestra like their smash or turtle soup, strong, stout, but only that. All that I have written is unnecessary for the exusion, only that is the only thing impossible; they never repeat, because time is dear to everyone now, only once, and this repetition is public. I have not yet been able to return all the letters, they must all be found at one hour, from 1-2 o'clock. They write me beautiful articles after journals here. And yesterday, at a concert in Kowent-gard, Viardowa sang my mazurkas and they told me to repeat them. She was visiting with my husband. I paid a visit and didn't find it. She had a different face like in Paris and she sang my stuff without being asked. She performed in Somnambula at the theater where Grisi, Persiani, Alboni, Mario etc. This theater (Covent Gard.) rivals the theater of the queen (Hay Market) where Lind and Lablache. Mrs. Lind also performed for the first time in Somnambula. I am sending you a piece of paper written two weeks ago. Mrs. Viardot had less success; The queen was not there and she was embarrassed, because not Mario, but Flavio sang with her. She was here while I was away, and I'm supposed to see them on Sunday. – Yesterday I had lunch with J. Lind, who then sang Swedish things to me until midnight. Such a character as distinct as ours. We Slavic, they have something Scandinavian, which is completely different, but we are closer to each other than an Italian to a Spaniard. Here I know all the most severe news about the Duchy of Poznań through Koźmian Stan. and Szulczewski, to whom Zaleski gave me word. Poverty and poverty; I don't want anything in my heart anymore. I have 3 forts. Apart from Pleyel, one Broadwood, the other Erard, but so far I can only play mine. I finally have a good apartment, but I barely got used to it, the host wants to make me pay twice as much, or take another room (I pay 26 guineas a month anyway). It is true that a large and wonderful salon and I can give lessons (I only have 5 people), but I don't know what else I will do; I will probably stay, because the other room is neither so big nor so good; so that once the address is given, do not change it. The excuse to change that in writing there was nothing done, so it can increase. As for Salt, my heart aches. Poor them all, because it can't always be good for us. That B. cries surprises me. So that the little ones and the mother do not cry. I haven't written to Pleyel yet. I do not know when. I hug you most cordially, your Ch. Here, the English newspapers write poorly about PS. Like, for example, that in some garden (probably Luxemb.) Ledru R[ollin] could be seen lying, and PS was standing next to him, and they were having a conversation. [1] Season (eng.) - season. [2] In gratiam (Latin) - on the occasion."
" am writing these two words to find out how your health is and what you are doing. I haven't gotten used to the London air yet - and a life of visits, dinners and social evenings weighs heavily on me. In recent days I have been spitting up blood - I have only been treated with lemon and ice cream - which has done me good, as well as the fact that I took a 3-day rest. I have already become acquainted with London society a little - I have been introduced to various Ladies whose names spring to mind as soon as they are pronounced. So I played on the occasion of the christening at the Duchess of Sutherland in the presence of the Queen, Prince Albert, the Duke of Prussia, Wellington and all the local most ""garter"" company (in a small circle of 80 people); Lablache, Mario and Tamburini also performed that evening. Her Majesty said some kind words to me. I doubt, however, whether I will play at court, because mourning is just beginning, which will last until the 22nd or 24th - for Her Majesty's aunt. I give lessons. I've been asked to play in a number of aristocratic salons, which brings me some guineas, which, however, are running out for all my frugality. The apartment alone now costs me 10 guineas a week (because when I installed myself and paid visits, the host raised my price). I live, it is true, in one of the most beautiful districts of London - I have a large living room with 3 pianos - one Pleyel, one Broadwood, one Erard. - The stairs are wonderful. Mrs. Manzourow (who is passing through here) thinks it's cheap, but I feel it all the more that my butler, an Italian (he's an Italian), is robbing me appropriately. He won't accompany me in the evening if I take a cab instead of a carriage. And I have to suffer all this, unable to find something better. But I believe I can do something about it. – I will not play in the Philharmonic, despite the encouraging proposals of these gentlemen. I don't want to toil in vain - play with one public rehearsal, so bad in a band - and take places from everyone who would like to get there (Halle is just the man they need, so I promised him that if I made a decision, I will inform him to make an effort). I also avoid big public concerts; I'm thinking of giving a concert in some aristocratic salon (concert limited to 150, 200 people). “I met Miss Lind. She is a lovely person and a brilliant singer. I saw Mrs. Viardot here again, very lovely. She was so kind that she sang my mazurkas at a concert in her theatre, even though I had not asked her to. So far, she has only performed in Somnbula - they are currently preparing The Barber and the Capulet for her. F.Ch. Please tell Franhomme that I will write to him and that I hug him with all my soul."
"to all my friends. My life. It's been ugly in here for a week and it's not helping me at all. At the same time, every day in the evening you have to go out into the world late. I don't have the strength to live like this. So that it would at least give me money, but so far only two evenings I was paid 20 gw each. I give a few lessons at home in Guinea, and I have no idea about a decent concert yet. I played for the Queen and Albert, the Prussian Duke and Wellington and all that is elegant, at the Duchess of Sutherland; and apparently it was very good, but now mourning for some aunt until 11 pm, so nothing at the court, so I doubt they would invite me there. I don't want to play in the Philharmonic, because it won't give me a penny, only a huge hassle; one repetition, and a public one at that, and you have to play Mendelssohn to have a great success. The big world usually only gives balls or vocal concerts; The Queen has not given a concert yet, neither Devonshire, only a ball. Sutherlands give 1 lesson a week. The Duchess of Somerset is also very kind to me; he invites me to evenings where Don Carlos's son usually hangs out, and Westminsters, and everything that the Duchess Madame (who is second only to the Queen at the coronation!!!) may receive. But the prince is not generous, so they don't pay. So today, despite the Duke d'Espagne, I will not go there, because I have dinner at eight o'clock with Lady Gainsborough (who is very polite to me). She gave une matinée [1] and introduced me to the first ladies. If only I could walk all day from Annas to Caifas, if I didn't spit blood for a few days, if I were younger, if I wasn't knocked over the head from attachment like I am, then maybe I could start my life anew. Adding a good servant to look after me and not to waste a penny or things. My apartment, my carriages make me unable to put it down yet; besides, my servant wastes my time. My good Scottish Ladies show me much friendship here; I always eat there if not in the world. But they are accustomed to trembling [2] and pounding around London with business cards all day in a vehicle, and would like me to pay all their friends a visit, and I'm barely alive. If I break three hours or four in a carriage, how come I come from Paris to Boulogne. And here are such distances!... There was a Polish ball here and it was very successful. I wasn't on my ticket, for I had no strength left, and I had dined first at Lady Kinlogh's with a great company of lords, chancellors, or whatever band-devils under waistcoats; I'm being presented there, but I don't know to whom and I'm not in London at all, 20 years in Poland, 17 in Paris, it's no wonder that I'm not very busy here, especially since I don't know the language. They don't talk when I'm playing, and they say they speak well of my music everywhere, but my little friends, whom they used to jostle here, make me seem to them some amateur, and soon I'll be some kind of grand seigneur [3], because I have clean shoes and cards I don't wear it with the inscription: gives lessons at home, goes to play in the evening, etc. The old Rothschild woman asked me how much I cost, because some lady who heard me asked her. Because Sutherland mi 20 gw. gave me, and it was here that Broadwood, whose piano I play, marked for my price, so I replied that 20 gw. She is kind and good, she tells me that I play very beautifully, it is true, but she advises us to take less, because this season we need more modes [4] . So from here I can see that they are not so generous here and that money is hard to come by everywhere. Among the bourgeoise class you need something astonishing, mechanical, which I can't do, the upper world, which travels, is proud, but educated and just, if you look closely, but so torn with a thousand things, so surrounded by conventional boredom, that it doesn't matter to me whether good or bad music when he has to listen to it from morning till night. Because here is an exhibition of flowers with music, dinners with music, events with music; Savoyards, Czechs, my friends, like dogs, and everything mixes up. I'm writing to you as if you don't know London! I'd like to give a concert in some private hotel; if I succeed, I'll have about 150 guineas; here is a rare thing, because the opera is 1000 and something, before the curtain opens, it is over 900! Both operas, I don't know if they will gain anything. Yesterday I saw Miss Lind again at Lucy Lammermoor. Very good; everyone is enthusiastic. - And Gutmann, poor man, how could he allow himself to be funny with his hands! Tell him to respect himself and not to tire his hand beforehand. “Viardowa has little success here because she's with Grisi and Alboni, who you know how popular they are. Viardot was with me the other day. He didn't tell me about Grzegorz, only that he had news. Also, I see, it has cooled down a bit. Poor Sol. If her husband comes here, what will she do? I am not far from thinking that the Mother is good with the Son-in-law, because it is similar to both. He talks like this sometimes, and sometimes differently, and Mother was too good with him now, if she saw him and started protecting him again, she would not completely forgive him for his brother-brother with Thor, in whose diary she writes and who supposedly told Rousseau about Augustine. What is this doll doing? And Arago, my God, what an ambassador! He can't speak German. To Bavaria, that's different, as a friend of Lola Montes! This is Liszt better for a diplomat. “I was also here last week for dinner with Guizot; I was so sorry to see, although braided with a golden fleece, you could see that he was suffering morally, although not without hope! I was wrong. I took a double piece of paper. Calm here. Irish or Chartist affairs do not alarm; it is not so huge as it seems from a distance, things and more are concerned here with the state of affairs in Paris, Italy and Poland, about which the Times is making such fuss that even the English are already struck by its unfavorableness. – Chojecki is crazy about getting the Czechs mixed up. Let them be nasty, as long as the tar of the infirm can be easily washed off in time. If they instill even greater poverty there, they will have a big bill with God. I hug you cordially. Your old Ch. \r\n [1] Une matinée - morning. [2] Trembalować (fr. trimballer) - to wander around. [3] Grand seigneur – great lord. [4] Moderesson (phonet. moderation) – moderately. \r\n"
" hope you are well and your husband too. I've been thinking about you a lot. “You live so close to the tollgates where so much blood has spilled. I hope your friends weren't among the victims of the last few days. Please give me a message about yourself. Are you still determined to leave Paris? “I think there has been a change. ""Anyway - count on excellent letters from me - perfect, at least from a distance - I asked for them from one of my pupils who came here for a while, and she sent them to me. Please let me know if the designs have changed. I am writing to you in haste, not having a good pen and ink. – I am suffering from a spleen attack [1]. I dismiss my Italian servant, a liar and a lazy man, to say nothing else. - He speaks as much English as I do. May God bless you and give you both health. Ch. Please forgive my [""spelling"" - deleted] style. Style is a man. My style is very stupid. I gave morning. There was an elegant world on it. Mario sang 3 times, I played 4. It was a success - it brought me 150 guineas; there were only 150 seats available and they were all booked out the day before. [1] Spleen (English) - melancholy."
May God help you in your work. Chopin.
"Forgive me for sending the old beginning (from 8 juillet), but I'm finishing it today. My dearest Life! God preserved you in these last days, which were only the real beginning (supposedly motivated) of the fierceness of the two parties. Because so far it has been in heads, in imagination and books, in the name of education, justice, solidarity, etc.; but now this mud, as martyrdom, will call for vengeance. And there is no end to revenge! The civil war of the principles followed by the necessary collapse of civilization in the form of today's ideas. Your great-great-great-grandchildren will come from free Poland in a few hundred years or to reborn France, or something else in that place. Yesterday (7 juillet) I gave my second matinée at Lord Falmouth's Hotel. Viardowa sang my mazurkas to me, among other things. It was very beautiful, but I don't know if I had 100 guineas profit. I'll find out on Monday. The saison ends here now. My projects I don't know how they will turn. I have little collection in my pocket; I don't know what I'll do. Maybe I'll go to Scotland. My Scotch girls are good, dear, but sometimes they bore me to the point of fear. I dismissed the Italian fool. I still keep the apartment, because I have three pianos, and I need a large living room. I have a better servant. My health for hours, but often in the morning I think I will cough up my soul. My soul is sad, but I am stunned; I even avoid solitude so as not to wonder, because one cannot be ill here for a long time, and I do not want to let myself be taken by any fevers. What does Sola do? Rozi?res wrote me a kind letter. good child. And write about my mother. Is Clé[singer] going to Russia? Damn there now!... Fool!... Write me a word about them. Duchess or in safety? Does Cichowski have any good news? Gut[mann] wrote to me, dear boy; good thing he didn't break anything. Here they are not afraid of any riots, and if what your diaries write, it is not much truth. Everything he has is written down here on the constable, and there are many greyhounds among them who want no volitions at all. At that moment I got a letter from Rozi?r[es]; that she saw you going to the wounded Dubos. Please, wish him health. I'm going to Viardowa to thank you. I will confess to you that I did not want to ask her to sing for me, but her brother was at my place just when Lord Falmouth Broadwood's salon suggested me, and he went straight to his sister, who promised to sing with great pleasure. Among other things, she sang my mazurkas. Tell de Rozi?res that Madame V. has been very kind, for it will get you here. Mrs. S. wrote, I know, to V[iardot] and inquired carefully about me!!! What part of a righteous mother she must play there. I can't finish this letter, my nerves are so messed up; I suffer from some stupid longing, and in spite of all my resignation, I do not know, but I am restless, what I will do with myself. With the penny collected, I may have everything, having knocked down the apartment, the carriages, from 200 guineas (up to 5,000 francs). You can live a year in Italy, but not half here. Saison is almost over. I haven't played at the Queen's, although before the Queen I played at Sutherland's. The Duchess of Suth[erland] has left. So maybe some royal director sewed shoes for me that I didn't return my visit to him or that I didn't want to play at the Philharmonic Institute. If the saison here lasted six months, I would slowly make myself known here in my own way, but yes, that's not enough time. Such a hustle for everything. Every day I'm somewhere in the evening. Lady Combermeere here last week, the Duchess of Cambridge and the Duke and an old Weimar and a Hessian, all very polite. In some corners, they already know me from the good side, but it takes time, and here is the end of the saison. Some of the journals there were nonsense. People here say that it means a lot here. But what's not so much here, they say, are guineas. they lie a lot; when they don't want what they want, they go straight to the countryside. One of my students has already left for the countryside and has not paid for 9 lessons, and the others, who are supposed to take two lessons a week, usually miss two, so they pretend more than they do. I'm not surprised because they want to do too much and everything. One per student from Liverpool came here for a week! I gave five lessons because they don't play on Sunday, and I was satisfied. Lady Peel, for example, wants me to give lessons to her daughter, who has great abilities, but as she had a meter, she took half a guinea and gave it twice a week, so they only ask me for one lesson a week to do the same in the sack . To say that she has lessons from me and will probably leave in two weeks. I receive a letter from you and at the moment I write back to you. And first, my Life, despite my great curiosity, I had to send off the journals you sent me, because for them the post office wanted 1 pound and 15 shillings, which means 45 francs, and since I had your letter, I refused the journals, which were so expensive, with less pain they cost money because you wrote on the envelope, and they make you pay like letters. I forgot to tell you that Charivary sent me something once, it cost me 5 shillings and something, because there was also writing on the envelope, so they made me pay for a letter. From 5 - 1 pound and 15 shill. far, so I had it repeated well by the host of the house and explained. So that was the postage scale. I refused and I don't think they will send you back, because your address is definitely not there. If by misfortune you somehow got it back and you have to pay, you would do better to send it back to me. But other times, don't do it again, because they inspect such things here, seal them with postage stamps and, as you can see, make you pay dearly. My good Scotch girls, I gave them your letter, but they bore me so much that I don't know what to do; they absolutely want me to go to their family in Scotland; It's beautiful, but today I don't feel like doing anything. Here, what is not boring is not English. What is Sol doing? And her mother? And de Rozieres? Speaking of the letter he sent me in yours, there is a fool whom I helped to leave Paris (his name is Wiemann), who writes me for money so that he can return to Paris again. Cybulus! For almost a year I fed him, he wanted to go; left with the first ward or the second and now back in poverty. May God defend and preserve what is happening to ours! I hug you cordially. Most Attached Ch."
My life. Thank you for all your kind words and for the letter sent from home. Healthy by the grace of God, but they are sad for me unnecessarily. - I can no longer be sad or happy - I felt myself completely - I just vegetate and wait for it to end sooner. 'I'm going to Scotland next week to see some Lord Torphichen, brother-in-law of my Scots, who already have them, near Edinburgh. “He wrote me a letter of invitation, and so did Lady Murray, a great, well-known lady there who likes music very much. – I do not count the multitude of other oral invitations with addresses, because I can no longer roam from corner to corner - such a life has passed me by - and I can't see anything in front of me at the end. – I will stay in Scotland until the 29th ao?t – and on the 29th I got involved in Manchester, where they give a great concert. I have to play twice without an orchestra and they'll give me ?60 for that. Alboni will come - but I don't care - I'll just sit down and play. I will live for a few days where Neukomm is, with friends of rich local factory owners. – What will I do with myself after that, I do not know – if I knew that I would not be sick here in winter!
 very dear friend. I am taking advantage of Mr Mankowski's kindness to send you the ?80 I have just received for your piano. May God give you peace and happiness. I love you, as always - as always and always F. Ch.
"My dearest ones. Thank you for your kind letter which I received in London a week ago. I stayed in London for 3 months – I was quite healthy on myself. I gave two morning concerts - one at Mrs. Sartoris [Addendum:] Mrs. Sartoris is nee Fanny Kemble, young, daughter of a famous English actor, and a famous English singer herself, who was only on stage for two years and married Mr. Sartoris, a rich man of the world , and who is adopted by the whole great world of London and goes everywhere, and everyone goes to her. Acquaintance from Paris. [Continuation of the letter:] and the second with Lord Falmouth, with great success, without much fuss [!]. – [Add:] Lord Falmouth, great lover of music, rich man, bachelor, great lord, his hotel on St. James's Square gave me for the concert. He was very polite to me - you could give him three pennies on the street - and he has plenty of footmen at home better dressed than he is. I knew his niece in Paris, but I didn't see her until the concert in London. [Continuation of the letter:] On one, Mario sang to me 3 times and I played 4 times; on the second, Mrs. Viardot played 3 times, and I played 4 times, which they liked very much, because they didn't know such short and knotty concerts here, only long, 20-number concerts with huge posters. [Add:] I am sending you a few words from Athenaeuin, a journal respected among artists. I do not have any other; anyway, what do you care about others, that there someone will say that it's good! Let Antek explain to you. [Continuation of letter:] I limited the number of listeners to 200 at Lord Falm's and 150 at Mrs. Sartoris', which brought me a guinea ticket (after deducting miscellaneous expenses) to 300 guineas. London is terribly expensive during the saison - the apartment itself with nothing (it is true that I had a very large and high living room, in which there were 3 pianos: one that Pleyel sent me, one that Erard prepared for me, the third one that Broadwood gave me), the very it is an apartment, because the stairs are grand and beautiful, and the entrance is magnificent, and Dover Street, by Piccadilly, cost ?80. Now the carriage, the servants, all very expensive, so that if I had not had lessons at home for a guinea and a few a day, it would be with me. I had some great evenings as soon as I arrived - and I don't know what he wrote to you from London that X-na Sutherland once had the Queen for dinner and in the evening with only 80 people from the London first world. – Apart from X-th Prussia (who was already close to leaving) and the royal family, they were only like Wellington old and the like (although the similarities are difficult). She presented me to the Queen. – Good queen, she spoke to me twice. X-że Albert approached the piano. Everyone told me it was rare stuff. Among the Italians who also sang that evening were Mario, Lablache and Tamburini. – No singer. I would like to describe the palace of the Duchess of Suth[erland] to you, but it is impossible. Everyone who knows says that the Queen of England has no such dwelling. - All the royal palaces and castles - old, splendid, but neither as tasteful nor as elegant as Stafford House (that is the name of the Palace of the Tenth Sutherland), adjacent to London's St. James, just like Blacha. For example, stairs are famous for their magnificence; they are neither in the hall nor in the vestibule - only in the middle of the apartments, as if in some huge drawing room - with delicious paintings, statues, galleries, upholstery, carpets in the most beautiful plan, with the most beautiful perspectives - so you could see the Queen on these stairs at the greatest light - surrounded by all the diamonds and ribbons - those garters descending with the greatest elegance, leading the conversation, pausing on the various platforms, where from each point there is something else to admire - it is true that it is a pity that some Paul Veronese could not see such a thing, to leave one more chef d'oeuvre [1] more. “After that night at X-na Suth[erland], I was told to play for the Queen, but I don't know why I didn't. ""Of course I didn't try, and here you have to try for everything, so many things."" Not only did I not try, but I did not visit the court chaplain, or rather the one who organizes the Queen's concert and is the director of the orchestra of the Philharmonic Society (local first concerts - appropriate for the Paris Conservatory). The Philharmonic Society offered me to play with them - a great grace, or rather a distinction, because everyone who comes asks for it, and Kalkb[renner] and Hallé did not play this year despite all the efforts - but I refused, what between some musicians had a bad effect, especially between the directors. And I refused once because I was not very healthy - that was the reason I gave - and the truth was that it was not appropriate for me to play only one of my concerts with the orchestra, and these gentlemen do only one rehearsal - and that's a public rehearsal, for which tickets are free let in. How to try and repeat! So we would have played badly (although they supposedly know my concerts here and Mrs. Dulcken, a famous (but!) local pianist, played there one last year); so I told you to thank the Philharm[onic] Society. “One newspaper took it against me—but that's okay. After my mornings, many papers had good articles, except in the Times, in which a certain Davison (creature of the late Mendelssohn) writes, who does not know me, and imagines that I am Mendelssohn's antagonist (as they say). It doesn't hurt. You just see that people are always driven by something else in the world but the truth. But let's get back to the London world. Well, my prix [2] for an evening in London was 20 pounds, but I only had 3 such evenings. The other was with the Marquis of Douglas (son of the Duchess Hamilton, whom I had known in Paris). The young Marquess is X-wife of Baden, She introduced me to X-wife Cambridge, the king's aunt (who, whenever I met later, always spoke to me a lot), X-weimar, old lady (not reigning). There was also the Duke of Hesse and a selection of London ladies: Lady Jocelyn, one of the famous beauties here, Lady Lincoln, Mark's sister. Douglas, Lady Granville (young), Lady Cadogan (my former pupil, today dame de compagnie[3] at the Duke of Cambridge), diplomats, among whom a few Germans who are now in London and whom I used to know in Paris. My third paid appearance, or rather the first in order, was with Lady Gainsborough, the Queen's former lady of honour, who also gathered the finest of the local aristocracy. As you know, they live by names and greatnesses here. Lady Dover, niece of X. Suther[land], X. Argyll, Lady Stanley (whose daughter, my Parisian apprentice, is now the Queen's lady of honour). Well, I'm going to tell you different names! I've known a great deal of the big world, Lady Ailesbury, Lady Peel, Lady Gordon, Lady Parka, among the iterators Carlisle, Rogers old, a very famous poet and respected friend of Byron, Dickens, Hogarth, Walter Scott's heartfelt friend, etc., etc. who wrote a beautiful article about me in ""Delinius"" about my 2nd concert. [Continuation of the letter:] between these: X-harvest Somerset; the prince is the first prince of England, and on great occasions, such as at a coronation, she comes right behind the queen. - Among the curiosities also Lady Byron, with whom we supposedly sympathize and talk like a goose to a piglet, she in English and I in French. I understand she bored Byron. Her daughter, Lady Lovelace (supposedly a beauty), also an interesting person. But who I had the pleasure of finding here was Lady Shelburne, former Mile de Flahaut, my pupil, and now the belle-fille [4] of Lord Landsdowne (Landsdaun), presiding over the council of ministers, who is very fond of music himself, and which saison gives great vocal concert. Lady Combermeere is also one of the ladies who have been kind to me. Before leaving, I was there for the evening, X-th Cambridge, Wellington, X-th, or rather c-th Montemolin, son of Don Carlos, Spanish pretender. Among the people I met who were interesting, for example, Lady Norton, famous for her beauty (and her husband's trial); [Addendum:] Barciński may know about her. [Continuation of letter:] Sheridan's daughter, a much-liked lady; Lady Blessington, whose daughter has married that c-te d'Orsay, who runs between fashion, and whose wife has gone away. Cth d'Orsay was very kind to me. I brought him a letter from his sister, Mother Gramont. Besides, he is an artist himself, he makes very beautiful sculptures and statues, he paints and draws. Among his beautiful breasts is the Marquise de Douro, wife of Wellington's son (to whom I also had letters). La marquise de Douro is one of the beauties here. Among the pleasant people here I met a very kind lady, Mrs. Milner Gibson, whose husband was a minister, some years ago; Lady Molesworth, who is also very kind to me. [Addendum:] I cannot omit: Lady Agatha Bruce, daughter of Lady Elgin, and lady of honor to the Duke of Kent, the Queen's mother. Very good and kind and polite; it is also an acquaintance from Paris. [Continuation of the letter:] It is difficult for you to list everything, but I cannot forget Mrs. Grota, whom I knew back in Paris (at Mr. Marliani). P. Grote is the wife of a member of the Parliament. There is a very bright person who rushed to protect Jenny Lind. She introduced me to her. Once she invited no one, only the two of us, from 9 am to 1 am we did not sit down from the piano. [Addendum to the place marked with an asterisk:] The queen, who returned to the city after hostile, opposition manifestations, was to be at the grand opera for the first time to show herself to the public, and the selected representation was also the first appearance of the arrived Miss Lind (in Somnambula), so huge hustle for tickets: chairs were sold for 3 guineas on the eve of the same day. I didn't know about it, because I had only just arrived, and on the same day someone told me that if I knew Mrs. Grota, she had great connections, apart from her box, and would be able to help me. I went to see her, and she immediately invited me to her box. I was very pleased with it, because neither the Queen, nor Jenny Lind, nor this delicious theater (Keen's [!] theater) had seen. But Mr. Grota's box was on the first floor, and I was panting up the stairs, so when I got home I found Mr. Lumley, the headmaster, a ticket to the best chair with compliments from Miss Lind and Mrs. Grota. The representation was the best, the Queen received a bigger applause as Jenny Lind; God save sang, the whole debout hall [6] and Wellington, and all the greats here. It is impressive to see this consideration and respect essential to the throne, to law and order; could not calm down from enthusiasm. [Continuation of letter:] Mrs. Lind was at my concert!!! which supposedly means a lot to fools, because he can't show himself anywhere without everyone looking at him with binoculars; and if it wasn't for the fact that she doesn't sing anywhere, even in great company, only at the opera, she would sing for me, as Mrs. Grote told me. But I never dreamed of asking her, although she's a good girl and we're perfect together. It is something else like the others. You could call it a Scandinavian string, a completely different nature from the southern one, for example Paulina Viardot. Ugly but nice on the stage, I don't always like it on stage, but in Somnombula from the middle of the second act, she is most completely beautiful in all and all respects, as an actress and a singer. I haven't seen Malibran, but I doubt she's grasped the role more tenderly. In others it is less good, and Swedish songs are the most pleasant for me, just as Mrs. Paulina [Viardot] sings Spanish ones. It was said that she was going to marry Mrs. Grota's brother, but I know for sure that she wasn't (it was even said that she was secretly married, but a fiancé was waiting for her in Sweden). Mrs. Grote is a very good person, although a great radical and original. He receives a lot of interesting people and dukes and lords and scholars, in a word, curiosity of the great world. Basem speaks, she doesn't beat around the bush, and someone who disagrees with her, when asked: ""Comment trouvez-vous Mme Grote"" [7] - ""Je la trouve grotesque"" [8] - he replied. Nevertheless, she has a good heart and she gave me proof of it: she invited me to the country with Mrs. Lind and Mrs. Sartoris, but I couldn't. Someone I also really liked was Ms. Sartoris (Kembie Farms). She knows me from the old days, and on evenings where the whole London world receives, she never asked me to play if she saw I didn't like it. She sings very beautifully herself and has the most beautiful in her head. She has two kids as beautiful as angels. She herself was very pretty, but today she got fat, so only the head like a camée is left. I am very at home with her; she is natural, she knows all my common faults through mutual friends, e.g. Dessauer, Liszt. I often chatted, and it seemed to me that with someone who knows you, and she only knows the rooms where we stayed in Tetschen with the Thuns, with whom she also spent some of her most pleasant times. She tells me that they mentioned us often and often there. about London, I will not enumerate other acquaintances, but among others I found old acquaintances here who were good to me, such as Bulwer, who was ambassador to Madrid, Lord Dudley Stuart, Comming Bruce, Lady Elgin's father, Moneton Milner, etc. ""Broadwood, the real Pleyel here, was my best and truest friend. He is a very rich and well-brought-up man, as you know, to whom his father left his estate and factory, and retired himself to the country. He has the most beautiful relations; he has accepted p Guizot with all the family to his house (he is well liked) Through him I met Lord Falmouth To give you an idea of his English courtesy: he visited me once in the morning, I was tired and told him I had not slept well. In the evening I return from Somerset Xmas, I find new elastic mattresses, pillows in the bed; after great matters my good Daniel (that is the name of my present very good servant) told me that Mr. Broadwood had sent and begged me not to say anything. Now, leaving London ten days ago, on the railway to Edinburgh, I found one gentleman; which presented itself to me from Broadwood and gave me two seats in the car instead of one (the other opposite, so that no one would embarrass me); besides, I was given in the same carriage by a Mr. Wood, an acquaintance of Broadwood, who also knew me (he saw me in 1838 at Lipinski's in Frankfurt!) and who has his music house in Edinburgh and Glasgow. Also good old Broadwood had my Daniel (who is neater than many gentlemen and handsomer than many Englishmen) put in the same carriage, and I traveled 407 English miles from London to Edinburgh via Birmingham, Carlisle in 12 hours by par express train (this is the least stopping convoy ). In Edinburgh, where I was ordered to stay in the first hotel (Douglas's-hotel), I stopped to rest a day and a half. I visited a beautiful city, the ugliest views of which I send on this paper (I couldn't get more beautiful ones). [Addendum:] People who always have beautiful things under their noses always admire something that is less beautiful, but which is not under their noses, because it is less ordinary. [Continuation of the letter:] There I found polite friends of my friends, who arranged for me to visit the city in their carriage. (Now everyone comes to Scotland for the opening of the hunts.) Having rested in Edinburgh, having heard a blind man playing my mazurka in a music store, I got into an English carriage drawn by a horse which Lord Torphichen had sent for me, and came here twelve miles from Edinburgh. Lord Torphichen is an old, seventy-year-old Scotsman, brother-in-law to Mrs. Erskine and Miss Stirling, my good Scottish ladies whom I have known for a long time from Paris and who are so kind to me, with whom I always stayed in London, and whom I could not refuse to come here, the more so as I have nothing to do in London, that I must rest, and that Lord Torphichen has kindly invited me. This place is called Calder House (pronounced Kolderhaus). It is an old manoir [9] surrounded by a huge park with hundred-year-old trees, all you can see is lawns, trees, mountains and the sky. Walls eight feet thick, galleries on all sides, black corridors with countless old portraits of ancestors of various colors, with various costumes, now Scottish, now with armor, now with weapons, nothing is lacking for the imagination. There's even a red hat that shows up, but I haven't seen it yet. Yesterday I looked at all the portraits, but I have not yet seen which one it might be that is breaking around the castle. My room, which I live in, has the most beautiful view possible. [Add:] Although this part of Scotland is not the prettiest. To Stirling, beyond Glasgow, in the north, there are these beauties. In a few weeks I promised to go to see Lady Murray, my first pupil in London, who usually sits in Edinburgh and plays music. Lord Murray lives in the most beautiful places by the sea, even by sea you have to go. Also afterwards I must go near Stirling to Keir, a place well known for its beauty, to my cousin Mr. Stirling, near the Lady of the Lake. “My good Scots here! I can't think of anything that won't be here immediately: even the newspapers of Paris bring me here every day. Quiet, calm and good, only in a week you will have to leave. The Lord asks me for the whole summer next year; I'd sit here all my life, but what's the point? [Continuation of the letter:] I am away from others, so that I can play and do what I like, without embarrassment, because with them, let Bartek tell you, the first thing for a guest is not to embarrass him in anything. I found a Broadwood piano in my apartment; in the drawing room is a Pleyel piano which Miss Stirling brought with her. In England, la vie de château [10] is very pleasant. Every day people come together for a few days. The most elegant devices, libraries, horses, carriages on orders, numerous services, etc. They usually come here, for example, for lunch, after bedtime. Dmuszewski's orthography loncz, at 2 o'clock (everyone eats breakfast at his place, whenever he wants, as he wants), and for dinner at 7 o'clock. In the evening they sit as much as they want, however they want. In the evenings I play Scotch songs for the old lord, which the good old man sings along to, and how he can express his feelings to me in French. Although all in high society, and especially the ladies, speak French, the general conversation is usually in English, and then I wish I could learn, and neither had the time nor the inclination to learn. Anyway, I understand common things, I won't let myself be sold and I won't starve to death, but it's not enough. This letter, which I have been writing for 10 or more days, I want to finish today, because I feel sorry for you that you have not received anything from me for so long. The good-natured de Rozi?rka wrote to me that she had a word to write to you without waiting for me. She went to her friends in the countryside to rest after all the emotions and fears they had there. Sol wrote to me; she is also with her husband's parents in Besançon, healthy, she saw her mother in Paris; Mother was advised to leave Paris. Having arrived in the village of Nohant, the peasants received her very badly (because she was involved in all bad things) that she had to leave and is in Tours. In these last days she got stuck in the great mud and put many others in trouble. They attribute to her the wicked proclamations that ignited the civil war. Her second diary, which also failed at all because it was ultra, only exacerbated the nearsighted, was banned; but it was already dying, like the first, for lack of readers. Who would have said it a few years ago! Her biography was printed and sold in the streets, written and signed by Augustyna's father, who complains that she had corrupted his only daughter, that she had made her a mistress for Maurycy - and despite her parents' consent she had married anyone - promising that she would marry her son; he quotes her own letters - in a word, the ugliest row that all Parisian cobblestones know today. This is wickedness on the part of the father - but the truth. Well, that benefit she was thinking of doing, and against which, in this way, I was from the first day this girl came into the house. It was necessary to leave her to her parents, not to make a head of a son who would only marry money (and only if they asked him badly, because he would have enough of it). But he wanted a pretty cousin at home. He did so much that her mother put her on a par with Sol. She was dressed in the same way, and better cared for, because Maurice wanted it. How many times did her father want to take her away, because Maurycy wanted to. Her mother was considered a madwoman, because her mother saw things clearly, but her father finally saw. So P. S. made this girl une victime [11] who was supposedly persecuted by her own parents. Solange saw it all, so she was embarrassing. Maurice needed this Lambert to hide him from Solanza and the servants. Borie needed Augustine to protect him from Solanza and Maurice. Maurycy needed Bori so that it would seem in the city that Borie was going to Aug[ustyna]. The mother was uncomfortable with her daughter, who, unfortunately, saw everything that was going on; hence lies, shame, wife and all. But let's go back to Scotland. 28 ao?t are waiting for me in Manchester, where I am to play a concert where Italy sings from London: Alboni, etc. They give me 60 guineas for it, and since it's not to be refused, I accepted it and I'm leaving here in a week. 200-several English miles, 8 hours by railroad. Good friends are waiting for me there, very rich manufacturers, with whom Neukomm lives (the best student of Haydn, the former Kapellmeister of the Brazilian Emperor, you know him by name). There is also Mrs. Rich (daughter of Mr. Mackintosh, a once highly respected Member of Parliament and speaker and writer) and a great friend of mine, as well as Mrs [!] Ersk[ine] and Mrs Stirling. After the concert I am to return to Glasgow to the belle-soeury of the local lord, from there to Lady Murray, then to Stirling, and at the very beginning of the Octobra in Edinburgh they want me to play. If it can bring me anything and I have the strength, I will gladly do it, because I don't know how to turn this winter. I have my apartment in Paris, as usual, but I don't know how it will turn out there. In London, many want to keep me for the winter despite the climate. I want something else, but I don't know what. I'll see in the Octoba according to my health and sack, so a hundred guineas more in my pocket won't hurt. If this London wasn't so black, and people not so heavy, and no coal smell, no fog, I would have learned English by now. But these Englishmen are so different from the French whom I have clung to as my own; yes, they take everything only for pounds, they like art because it's lux; kind hearts, but such originals that I understand how one can stiffen oneself here or turn into a machine. – If I were younger, I would maybe let myself into the machine, I would give a concert in all corners and win the most tasteless brawls (if only for money!); but now it's hard to start making a machine out of yourself. The weather here today, so nothing comes to my mind dry. The park is wonderfully illuminated - in the morning - and I forget about everything - I'm with you, I'm fine and only then will I think about winter, when it is absolutely necessary. Now I hug you warmly. Ch. [Add.] How good that Ludwika is in the country! Both Mameczka and Izabelisko should also take a ride past the garden where I can see all the flowers, fruits and railings. I kiss and kiss Bartek, as well as Kalasanty. I will not wish Ludwika a name day, because there is nothing to talk about. May God hide and bless you, protect you and give you health, let your kids grow up for comfort. Write to me at the usual address in Paris, because your letter will be sent to me from there, wherever I turn. I will always write to you where I think to spend the winter. [1] Chef d'oeuvre - a masterpiece. [2] Prize – price, fee. [3] Dame de compagnie – a companion. [4] Belle-fille - daughter-in-law. [5] Fashion (eng.) – here: fashionable world. [6] Debout - while standing. [7] Comment trouvez-vous Mme Grotto? – What do you think about Mrs. Grota? [8] Je la trouve grotesque - I think she's a freak. [9] Manoir – mansion, house. [10] La vie de château – life in a castle.[11] Une victime – victim \r\n \r\n """
" very dear friend. I don't know what to tell you - I think it's best not to even try to console you for the loss of your father. I know your worry - even time has little effect on this kind of pain. I left London a few days ago. In 12 hours I made my way to Edinburgh (407 English miles). Having spent the day in Edinb. I have arrived at Calder-House 12 miles from Edinburgh, the castle of Lord Torphichen, Mrs. Erskine's brother-in-law, where I intend to stay the rest of the month and rest from my great London deeds. I gave two mornings of music, which they said they liked, but nevertheless bored me. I do not know, however, how I could have spent three months without them in this dear London, keeping a large apartment, which was absolutely necessary, a carriage and a servant. My health is not bad, but I am getting weaker and the climate here still does not suit me. Miss Stirling was to write to you from London and asks me to explain it to you. These ladies have indeed had a great deal of preparation ahead of their trip to Scotland, where they intend to spend several months. One of your pupils, Mr. Drechsler, lives in Edinburgh, I believe. He visited me in London - he impressed me as a good boy who loves you very much. how will I do it as I promised to be in Manchester on August 28 to play the ?60 gig. There's Neukomm - and assuming he doesn't improvise for me the same day, I reckon I'll make that ?60. What will I do with myself after that, I don't know. – I would very much like to be given a lifetime salary for not composing anything, not even a melody ? la Osborne or Sowiński (both good friends - one Irish, the other my countryman, of whom I am prouder than of the repulsive representative Antoni Kątski, a Frenchman from Northern beasts from the South). After these remarks made in parentheses, I must confess to you that I really do not know what I shall do with myself in the autumn; anyway, don't complain about me if you haven't heard from me, because I often think about writing to you. If you see Miss de Rozi?res or Grzymała, one of them will know something about me - if not from me, then from one of our mutual friends. The local park is very beautiful, the owner of the park is a very nice man, so I feel as good as can be. – Musical ideas are out of the question – I am completely derailed – I feel like, for example, a donkey at a masquerade ball or like an E violin string on a basset – surprised, confused, stunned as if I heard Bodiot's phrase (before February 24) or the strokes of a bow Mr. Cap (after the June days). ""I hope they're doing well."" I cannot omit them when writing to you. ""Now for another serious question: I hope you're not mourning any of your friends after all these terrible events."" And the health of Mrs. Franchomme and the children? Write me a word and address London, M. Broadwood, 33, Great Putney Street, Golden Square. Here I have (materially) the most complete peace and listen to lovely Scottish songs - I wish I could compose anything, if only to please these good ladies, Mrs. Erskine and Miss Stirling. I have a Broadwood piano in my room, Miss Stirling's Pleyel is in the drawing room - I have no want of paper or pens. I hope that you will also compose something - and God grant that I can hear this new work soon. I have friends in London who advise me to spend the winter there - but I will only follow my advice - I don't know what to call it - or rather, the one who advises me last - which sometimes amounts to the same thing as to think carefully alone. Adieu, dear, dear friend - always your Ch. I wish your Lady all the best for her children. I hope that René is playing with his cello, that Cecilia works diligently, and that their little sister reads her books. Please give my regards to Mrs. Lasserve and correct my spelling as well as my French. The people here are ugly - but they seem to be kind. Cattle, on the other hand, are beautiful, though they seem malicious; milk, butter, perfect eggs, and thus - cheese and chicken."
"Dearest friend. Before my departure for Scotland, where I intend to spend a few weeks in peace (if possible), I wrote you a short note from London, sending you ?80 which Lady Trotter gave me for your piano. Mr. Mańkowski, who wanted to deliver this sum to you, is a very polite young man - Koźmian's friend - and loves music; I hope he managed to see you. I would be very pleased to hear something about you and find out how you are through him. As for me, I'm suffocating in this beautiful Scotland - for a change. I am surrounded by a beautiful park with ancient trees, (Hamptoneourt, where are you?) The castle where I live is the old seat where John Knox, the Scottish reformer, held his first supper. Some walls are 8 feet thick; endless corridors full of old portraits of ancestors, one blacker and more Scottish than the other; nothing is missing here - there is even a red cap that is supposedly appearing . After all that has happened on the Continent, I suppose the spirit is busy changing his headdress - he would be a disgrace if he were to be mistaken for one of your evil spirits - for he has not been seen for some time. If only red hats could always change the spirit! I hope that they do not scare you in the country, that it is beautiful and that you find rest there after the days spent in Paris. May God send you happiness. – Please keep your friendship for me – I love you always and always, with all my heart, F. Chopin. My current address: Lord Torphichen Calder House Mid-Calder - Scotland - after 25th of this month. at 33 Broadwood, Great Putney Street, Golden Squ."
"My life. If I were healthier, I would go to London [!] to hug you tomorrow. Maybe we'll see each other sooner or later. We are old cymbals, on which time and circumstances have won their unfortunate trills. Yes, old dummies, although you will defend yourself from this company. This does not offend beauty or nobility: la table d'harmonie perfect, only the strings have broken, some pegs have popped out. The only misfortune is that we have a famous lutenist, some Straduary sui generis, a robot who is no longer there to repair us. We cannot produce new tones under bad hands and we suffocate everything that no one will ever get out of us for the lack of a lute player. I can barely breathe: je suis tout pr?t ? crever [1] and you will probably go bald and stay over my stone like our willows, do you remember? – what is the bare head showing. I don't know why Jasio the deceased and Antek are on my mind now, and Witwicki and Sobański! Those with whom I was most in harmony also died to me; even Ennike, our best tuner, drowned. So I no longer have a well-tuned, according to my custom, piano. in the world. Moos died and no one makes shoes so comfortable for me anymore. Let 4 or 5 more go to St. Peter's gate and my whole life will be more comfortable ad patres [2] . My dear ones, both Mother and Sisters, by the grace of PB they are alive, but damn! Titus is also good! You still count, as you can see, to my oldest memories, and I to yours, because you are supposedly younger (as it means a lot today, who has two hours more than us!). I assure you that I would gladly agree to be even much younger than you, to embrace you on my journey. That yellow fever did not seize you, and jaundice did not seize me, it is incomprehensible - because we were both exposed to these yolks. I write you nonsense, because I have nothing reasonable in my head. I'm vegetating, waiting for winter patiently. I dream now of home, now of Rome, now of happiness, now of poverty. No one plays to my taste today, and I was so understanding that I could listen to Sowiński's Oratorio with pleasure and not die. I am reminded of Norblin, a painter who said that a certain painter in Rome saw the work of one another and got so unpleasant that he... died. What I have left is a big nose and a 4th finger immature. You are wicked if you do not write back a word to my present epithre [3] . Wrong time has chosen for your trip. ""However, may God of the Fathers guide you."" - Be happy! I think you did well to settle in New York instead of Havana. If you see Emerson, your famous philosopher, remind him of me, hug Herberg, and kiss yourself and don't frown. Your old Ch. [1] Je suis tout pr?t ? crever - I'm almost dying. [2] Ad patres (Latin) - with fathers; in that world. [3] Epitr (properly épître) – a letter, an epistle with a humorous undertone."
"My dearest Life. I am at Calder-House, not far, twelve English miles from Edinburgh, with Lord Torphichen, the 78-year-old brother-in-law of Mrs. Erskine and Stirling. I've been here for two weeks now. I don't like the climate; yesterday and today I spit blood, but for me, you know, it doesn't mean much. On the London to Edinburgh railroad, par l'Express train [1], I did 407 miles in twenty hours, maybe that also stirred my blood a little. Anyway, never mind. I'm here to rest after the London saison and sit quietly until the 28th of the month that awaits me in Manchester. I promised to come play in a concert that Italy, Alboni, etc., give, and they give me ?60 for it. Impossible to refuse these days. After 28, I don't know what I'll do. Schwab, a rich manufacturer, whom you may have seen at Leon's, is waiting for me in Manchester. Not in the city itself, but a few miles from the city, Neukomm lives and lives there with them. Mrs. Rich will also come, that good old English woman, something saw her at my place, with Miss Stirling; so I will not be alone and it will be faster for me. In 7th I am again invited to Scotland, where 7th is said to be very beautiful, but not here, but near Glasgow, to Lady Murray and to Keiru near Stirling, to Stirling, Mrs. S[tirling's cousin]. I do not count the various others whom I could not visit, because I cannot roam from corner to corner. So I will stay 15 days each with one (my student) and another, a rich bachelor and intelligent. In Edinburgh they want me to play on the 2nd or 3rd Octobra. If it's not cold yet (they say it's fine yet, and that will bring me a hundred pounds), I'm ready to return from Manchester to Scotland; 8 hours less than an iron road. My present butler is excellent and kind, so it makes my life easier. Then what will I do with myself, I'm afraid to think. However, I must return to Paris to decide something about the apartment. If by any chance you see Larac, my steward of the house, ask him to take care of his rent. He texted me, but that's okay. And Mrs. Etienne also give a good word and tell her to ventilate that I will probably come soon. And you, darling, if it weren't for those passing by, you would have had a word from me a long time ago, but I started to you a thousand times and tore or burned a thousand. At the same time, I also wanted to write back to Mother, who has not had a letter for three months, but time passes on the most trivial things. I wanted to compose a bit here: you can't, you always have to do something else. I read that the Duchess was in her hotel. God, let nothing happen to Witold in Italy. Remind me there like a faithful dog, and thank me for the letter to Lord Stuart. May God not forget you. hug your friends. Write me a word yourself at: chez M. Broadwood, 33, Great Putney Street, Golden Square. I commend you a letter to mine as my greatest work. I may not write another one so soon. Miss Derozi?res [!] was about to go to the country, as I saw in her letter, so I am not writing to her. Sol in Besancon and her mother in Tours, Viardot told me. What was it with her! Where's Augustine? May God protect you and hide you so that I find you well. I will write to you soon; now I'm done, because from the castle to the post office three English miles and time, and tomorrow is Sunday. Your most affectionate Ch. [A note on a sheet in ornate steel engraving with a view of Edinburgh from Carlton Hill] The moment I seal, I receive your letter. My dearest Life. Never doubt me; but I couldn't, as I love you, finish the letter I started every day. ""Tell De Larac about the apartment that I will write to him and either send the money or come myself."" If only I knew I'd have something to eat in Paris in winter! I will write to you from Manchester. May God keep you, Here they cherish me a lot; I'm better at home, because such a home is difficult. There is only a red cap, or a red hat, which appears as in all Scottish ballads, but I have not seen it yet, and cannot find it in the corridors here, which of the innumerable and sooty ancestors it could be. I will write to Sal. I don't like Petersburg. I will also write De Rozi?rce. I hug you most cordially Ch. [1] Par l'Express train - express train. [2] From the ancetres (French: les ancetres) – from the ancestors."
"My dearest Life. I have been in Manchester since I wrote to you. I was very well received; I had to sit down to the piano 3 times. Beautiful hall, 1200 people. I lived in the countryside (because there was too much smoke in the city); all the rich have their apartments outside the city. I stayed with the good Schwabe; Have you ever seen him at Leon's? One of the first manufacturers, he owns the tallest chimney in Manchester, which cost ?5,000. He is a friend of Cobden and a great libre echanist himself [1]. A Jew, supposedly a Protestant, like Leon. His wife is especially good. They wanted to keep me, because J. Lind is coming there this week and will also stay with them (they are very friendly). During my stay there was also that dear Mrs. Rich whom you saw with Miss Stirling at my place. I also saw Brother Leon at Schwabe's, who also trades there. This Schwabe knows Albrecht of Le Havre, so I immediately sent through him to our Albrecht to pay his rent and perceptor [2] in Orléans Square. My life, tell de Larac. Thank you for your kind letter and for the Nossarz. I don't think about a wild cat, because my cachemire weighs heavily on me. Give him a hug and tell him I'll try as soon as I lift him. But seriously, I'll try it, maybe when it's cold! You sent me a good letter from Princess Marceline. She asks if I am still in London and to let her know about it poste restante when I go to Ostend. If I was stronger, I'd go right away to answer. Another letter was from Chrystian Ostrowski, who finds out about Mickiewicz's drama, which once Mrs. Sand had in her hand, and which she gave to the editorial office de la ""Revue Indépendante"". There was a great mess there. Pernet, one of the successors, died, and the other, François, blames Pernet because he does not know where he has misplaced him. So Ostrowski strangely asks me when it was? and if sometimes there is no copy, and where is Mr. Sand now, so that he can go to her!!! I know they looked for this drama once and didn't find it. I will not reply to such letters as Ostr., and since I am telling you about them, I am asking you to open them better and send only the necessary ones. I'm here with the Houstons. She is the sister of my Scottish ladies. The castle is very beautiful and rich, kept on a large foot. Here I shall stay a week, and then go to Lady Murray's to a still more beautiful country, where I shall stay another week. Maybe I'll play in Edinburgh, so I'll stay in Scotland until October. Please address your letters now: ? Mr le Docteur Lishinski Warriston Crescent Edinbourgh - Scotland Łyszczyński, a Pole, a doctor-homeopath in Edinburgh, who is well married, sits quietly and is a complete Englishman. He will know where to send me the letter. This letter, started yesterday, ends today, but time has changed, and it's ugly outside, and I'm angry, and I'm sad, and people bore me with their excessive care. And I can't breathe, and I can't work. I feel alone, alone, alone, although surrounded. [The next seven lines are completely crossed out so that they cannot be read.] Why should I bore you with my jeremiads! You're up to your ears. I should entertain you with my letter. If I was in a good mood, I would describe to you one Scotswoman, the 13th cousin of Mary Stuart (sic! husband, what is his wife's name, he seriously told me that). Here only cousins and cousins of great families and great names that no one on the continent has heard of. All genealogy conversation always; similar to the Gospel, which this one gave birth to this, and that that, and that another, and so on two pages up to the Lord Jesus. They're setting up a gig for me here in Glasgow. I don't know what will come of it. My dear ones here are very good, they have great delicacies for me. There are a lot of different Ladys here, old, 70- and 80-year-old lords, and no youngsters at all, because they are on the hunt. You can't go out here because it's been raining and storming for several days. I don't know how my journey to Strachar (to Lady Murray) will be; you have to cross Loch Long (one of the most beautiful lakes here), go around Scotland on the eastern coast, but it's only 4 hours away. Today is the 9th. I am sending you my old letter from 4th sept. Spare me all the scribbles; you know what a torment it is for me to write sometimes, my pen burns under my finger, my hair is falling out, and I can't write what I want, only a thousand unnecessary things. I did not write to Sola or to Derozi?rka. I'll write when I'm less messed up. I hug you. Yours until death Ch. Write and may God keep you. Miss Etienne, give me a good word and say I won't forget her. I forgot to write to you that since my last letter I had a strange accident which fortunately ended in nothing but may have cost me my life. We were going to the neighborhood by the sea. The vehicle in which I rode was un coupé [3] with two beautiful young purebred English horses. One horse began to dance, got its leg tangled, began to kick, the other did the same; as they disperse sur une pente [4] in the park, the reins broke off, the coachman fell off the box (he was badly broken). A crushed carriage, balloted from tree to tree [5]; we flew into the abyss... if only one tree stopped the carriage. One horse broke free and flew madly, and the other fell, crushed by the carriage. Branches pierced the window. Luckily, I was fine, just a little bit of leg injury from balloting. The servant skilfully jumped out, and only the carriage was crushed and the horses wounded. The people who saw it from a distance shouted that two were killed, because they saw one thrown down, the other falling to the ground. Before the horse moved I was able to get out of the carriage and I don't care, but none of those who saw it, nor any of us who were there, understand that we are not crushed to a pulp. I was reminded of the Berlin ambassador (Emanuel) in the Pyrenees; he was balloted that way too. I confess to you that I have seen the last hour calmly, but the thought of broken legs and arms terrifies me greatly. I still need a disability. \r\n [1] Libre echanist - supporter of free trade with foreign countries. [2] Perceptor - tax collector. [3] Un coupé – a two-person closed buggy. [4] Sur une pente - on the slope. [5] To ballot (from French balloter) – to throw something, to throw."
Dearest friend. Instead of a letter, I am sending you Mr. Telefsen, who will spend a few days in Paris. P.Ed. Rodrigues told you about him before Rewol. 48. He is my disciple and has been very kind to me - and will be even more so when he brings me messages from the Lord. He will also tell you about everything I'm doing – I wish he could tell you what I'm going to do – but I don't know it myself, except that I will love you always, always – with my heart devoted to you F. Chopin. Please be good to him.
"My dearest Life. At the moment when I began to write to you on another piece of paper, they brought me your letter with your sister's. At least that cholera protects them so far - but why don't you write a word about yourself - you have a pen easier than me - because I have been writing to you every day since returning from northern Scotland (Strachur nad Loch fine) for a week. And I know that you have someone sick in Versailles - because de Rozi?res wrote to me that you were at her place and that you were in a hurry to see someone sick in Versailles. ""Isn't it Grandpa?"" ""I don't want to think it could be your grandson or your good Rohan neighborhood."" ""Anyway, I'd rather someone you don't care about."" 'Here you haven't heard of cholera yet, but it's starting in London. With your letter at Johnston Castel (in which you wrote to me about Soli that you were at the Gymnasium), another one came from Edinburgh, informing me that the X-Directory Alexandrostwo had arrived and was happy to see me. “Although tired, I took the railway and found them still in Edinb. X-woman Marcelina the same kindness as last year. – I revived something under their Polish spirit, it gave me strength to play in Glasgow, where dozens of nobles came to hear me. The weather was fine and the 10th also came from Edinburgh by train, and little Marcelek, who is growing up beautifully (he can sing my compositions and sings them when they don't play as they should). – It was Wednesday at 3 o'clock and the 10th was so good that they later accepted invitations to dinner at Johnston-Castel (12 miles from Glasgow). So we spent the whole day together. – Lord and Lady Murray, old Lord Torphichen (who came a hundred miles) went there together too, and the next day everyone could not praise Marceline's X-mart. The 10th returned to Glasgow, from where, having seen Loch Lomone, they were to return to London, and from there to the continent. X-żna spoke to me in a very loving way about you - with a great heart - and I understand what your noble soul can suffer. ""You won't believe how much it made me feel that day."" But today I am already depressed - and fog, and although from the window at which I am writing to you, I have the most beautiful view under my nose on Stirling-Castel (that castle near the city of Stirling, the same as in Robert Brus - at night on the rock - remember?) and mountain, and lakes - and a lovely park - in a word, one of the well-known, very beautiful Scottish sights - but I don't see anything of it, only sometimes, if it pleases the mist, it gives way to the sun for a few minutes, which does not bother it much here. The master of this house is called Stirling, great-uncle of our Scots, and chief of that name. I met him in London - a rich bachelor. [Addscript:] He has many beautiful pictures here - Murillo and many Spaniards - now he has published an expensive work (as you know, they can do it) about the Spanish school. - He traveled a lot everywhere and in the East - he has reason. [Continuation of the letter:] The whole English world, which travels around Scotland, visits him. An open house, usually with 30 people for dinner. Various famous beauties are here now (Mrs. Norton left a few days ago) - dukes, lords - and there are more of them this year as usual, because the Queen was in Scotland and unexpectedly passed by yesterday, on the railway - because she must be in London for a day and there was such fog on the day appointed for departure by sea that it did not flow as it had arrived and as sailors and ordinary processions expected it, only prosaically from Aberdeen at night by rail - which, as they say, X Albert must have liked very much who gets sick at sea, while the queen, as the true Lady of the sea, is not afraid of him (the sea). Soon I will forget Polish - I will speak French from English - and I will learn English from Scottish and I will look like old Jaworka, who spoke 5 languages at once. - If I do not write you jeremiads, it is not because you will not console me, because you are the only one who knows all mine - but because when I start, there is no end, and always one thing. – I am wrong to say one thing, because I am getting worse in terms of the future. - I feel weaker - I can't compose anything, not so much for lack of desire as for physical obstacles, because I hit a different branch every week. What am I supposed to do! “Anyway, it saves me some money for the winter. I have plenty of invitations and I can't even go where I'd rather go, like Xna Argyl or Lady Belhaven, because it's too late for my health. All morning, for example, until 2 o'clock, I'm useless now - and then, when I get dressed, everything embarrasses me and I'm panting until dinner - after which you have to sit with the men at the table for two hours and watch what they say and listen to, as they drink. Bored to death (thinking of something else like them, despite all the politeness and interlocution in French at that table), I go to the living room, where it takes all the strength of my soul to revive myself a bit! - because then I am usually curious to hear - then my good Daniel carries me up the stairs to the bedroom (which, as you know, they usually have on the first floor), undresses me, puts me down, leaves a candle, and I am allowed to breathe and dream until morning, until it won't start again. And when I get used to somewhere a bit, you have to go somewhere else - because my Scotch girls don't give me a room, they either come to pick me up or drive me around the family (NB I always order myself and invite myself very much) - they will suffocate me out of kindness and I will not refuse them out of courtesy. Your Frederick."
" thank you very much for your kind letters, and I am very sorry that I cannot give you the same pleasure with mine. You know my morbid inability to put two words together without real suffering; so I count on your memory and imagine that you have forgiven me. I have just received a word from Ludwika, who fondly remembers you. He writes to me that everyone is healthy there; cholera saves them. Other parts of the letter are less comforting. Didn't I send you Ludwika's letter from London, intended for you? I had one, I'm sure, and (unless it was locked up with other papers in London) I believe I sent it to you. Could my Italian, who was already on his way out at that time, have kept the letter I had entrusted him to send out of curiosity? It'll be clear someday. In any case, please do not resent Ludwika about it, because I know that I still have a word for you in London. I only received two letters from Poland, one from Warsaw, and the last one written in a village near Toruń, where Ludwika and her children spent their holidays. “What you are telling me about Sol makes me sad. I'm really worried about Lucy. If Sol ever went to Russia, who would she talk to about France? Who would she be able to say a word to in Beryshon? It may seem like a trifle, yet the greatest consolation in a foreign country is to have someone who mentally transports us to our homeland whenever we look at him, talk to him or listen to his speech. ""And why would you give up your travels?"" Unless you have already gained enough strength for the winter, this winter which I do not know where I will spend. I'd like to do my best, and I'm sure I'll do my worst. But that's my fate! No one escapes his destiny. I'm suffocating more than a month ago in this beautiful country of Walter Scott. The Queen just left Aberdeen Shire yesterday. All England has come to Scotland this year, both to assist Her Majesty and because there is no quiet corner on the Continent. The place where I currently live is called Keir in Perth-shire, near Stirling. Tomorrow I am going to Edinburgh where I will stay for a few days; I might even play there. Don't imagine, however, that this gives me nothing but occupancy other than impatience and despondency, but I meet many people here who seem to like music and pester me to play, and I play out of courtesy, regretting each time again and swearing that I would not be fooled again... If the weather had been nice, I would have stayed here until October, because I have invitations that I have not been able to take advantage of, and life in grand residences is really interesting. “It is something unknown on the continent. If the weather is fine, I'll go to visit the Duchess of Argyll in Inverary on Lone Lake, and Lady Belhaven, one of the greatest houses in the country. Lady Belhaven is here at present, and entertains about thirty people besides her, among whom are very beautiful, very intelligent, very original, very deaf, and even one - bearing a very famous name (Sir Walpole) - blind. – Toilets, diamonds, pimples on the nose, the most beautiful hair, the most wonderful figures, devilishly beautiful creatures and devils without beauty. The last category is the most common everywhere. The whole company is going to Edinburgh today on the Caledonian Rout. There will be races, games, balls, etc. all week long. It is fashion in this area, the hunting club organizes fetes every year. The entire aristocracy of the country comes to this. But enough rumours. I do not know when I will write to you again. I must now write to mine, to Sol, to whom I have written 50 drafts. I cross out more than I write letters, so it's not laziness. I hope to see you soon (a ray of sunshine announces it to me); but just let it hide and I'll be of the opposite opinion. So please give me a firm handshake and write to me at the same address in Edinburgh; no matter where I am, the letter will find me. More Franchomme! I didn't answer him, but it's impossible to write everything I want to my friends. All this together is very silly; I must finish, or I would tear the letter if I kept crossing it out. Goodbye and thousands of best regards. Always sincerely devoted Ch. I am writing to Grim."
My letter started in Keir, only today, 3 octobra, in Edim[urgu] I finish. Today the weather is even warm, and I feel better. I'm supposed to play here tomorrow evening, but I haven't seen the hall yet, and I haven't put together a program. Jenny Lind and Mrs. Grote, whom I met on the railway, were also here, and went to Glasgow to represent them. And Grisi, and Mario, and Alboni, and everything was here. Jenny Lind goes to Dublin from here. They didn't like it this year as much as they did last year. Because it's not new anymore. Roger as a tenor in Somnambula, but between us, the same wigmaker as always. I'm done because it's time. I hug you with my soul. Yours until death Ch. write me. If you see Delacroix, give me a hug. I also send a letter to de Rozi?res. My address is always Łyszczyński.
"Dear friend. What are you up to? How are yours? What's up in your country, in your art. You are wrong to sulk at me - you know my inability to write. I've thought a lot about you, and recently when I read about the riots in Heidelberg, I started with half a dozen letters to you, which I finally burned. This card will surely reach you and find you by your good mother's side. Since the last time you wrote to me, I am in Scotland, Walter Scott's beautiful country, with all my memories of Mary Stuart, two Charles, etc. I wander from one lord to another, from one earl to another. And everywhere I am received with the most cordial kindness and boundless hospitality, everywhere I find excellent pianos, beautiful paintings and select libraries; also hunting, dogs, endless dinners, and cellars, which I use the least. It is hard to imagine how sophisticated splendor and comfort reign in English castles. As the Queen spent several weeks in Scotland, the whole of England followed her as much for etiquette and courtesy as for the revolution that troubled the continent. Everything appeared in redoubled splendour, except the sun, which is eternally the same; winter is already beginning to approach - and what will become of me, I do not know yet. I am writing from Lord Torphichen's house. It is here, above the room I occupy, that John Knox, the Scottish reformer, first gave communion. All this appeals to the imagination - a park with ancient trees, abysses, ruins of ancient castles, endless corridors with countless portraits of ancestors; there is even a red cap that walks around at midnight. And I walk there with my insecurities. The cholera is coming; in London fog and spleen, in Paris there is no president. But wherever I go with my cough and my shortness of breath, I will always love you. My respect for your Mother and best wishes for happiness to all of you. Write a few words at: Dr Lishinski, 10 Warriston Crescent, Edinbourgh, Scottland. Your Chopin with all my heart. PS I played in Edinburgh; all the local aristocracy gathered to hear me; they say it was good - a little luck and some money. This year they were in Scotland: Lind, Grisi, Alboni, Mario, Salvi - in short, everyone."
"My life. I have been ill for 18 days, since the day I arrived in London. I didn't leave the house at all, I had a runny nose attack with headache, shortness of breath and all my bad symptoms. The doctor visits me every day (a homeopath, Dr Mallan, whom my Scottish Ladies know - known here, has Lady Gainsborough's niece behind him). He tricked me into playing yesterday at that Polish concert and ball (which was very splendid), but after returning home, I couldn't sleep all night. I suffer from a headache, apart from coughing and shortness of breath. So far, great fogs have not started here yet, but in the morning I have to order the windows to be opened, despite the cold, in order to swallow some air. I'm 4, St. James's Place, where I've been sick for 2? weeks now. I see the good-natured Szul[czewski], Broadwood, Mrs. Erskine (who followed me here with Mrs. Stirl[ing], as I wrote to those from Edinb.), and especially the Duke of Alexandrostwo. X-na Marcelina is so good to me that she comes to the hospital almost every day. Always address me to Szulcz[ewski]. – So now I can't go back to Paris, but I'm thinking about how to be there. Here, in this dwelling which is good for any other healthy celibate Member of Parliament, I cannot stay - though in a beautiful place and inexpensive, 4? guineas a week with firewood, linen, etc., in the vicinity of Lord Stuart, who in this a moment left me, so kind-hearted, he came to find out how I was after playing yesterday. “Well, I'll probably move into another one near here, with bigger rooms, where I can breathe better. All out cas [2]. ""Please find out if there's anywhere on the boulevards from the Rue de la Paix - or Rue Royale - somewhere on the first floor south towards Magdalena or Rue des Mathurins."" So that there would be no Godot or any sad narrowness, that there would be a room for the servant too. – If only in Square at 9 (where the good Mrs. Etienne, e.g. Frank's apartment, which was up for grabs above mine). My present inability to survive the winter [keep], because I know it from experience - if at least on the same stairs there was a room for a servant. I would keep Miss Etienne anyway. But I would not dismiss my present, which if I wished or could return to England, already aware of things. Why, why am I bothering you with all this, I don't know - because I don't want anything. ""But I'm supposed to think about myself, so help me in this matter - and write down your whims."" ""I've never cursed anyone, but it's so unbearable now that I think it would be easier for me to curse Lucrezia."" But they must suffer there too, and they suffer all the more as they must grow old in anger. ""I miss salt forever."" “The world is not going so well right now. Arago with an eagle on him! Represents France!!! “Louis Blanc is not considered here at all. - Caussidier was pushed out by the national guardsmen from the Hotel de la Sablonni?re (Leicester Square) from the table d'hôte [3] where he also came - they told him that Vous n'?tes pas Français ... [4] and drove them out with kulaks. The hotel owner himself had to escort him across the Square, lest they beat him to death - because London's scumbags were already starting to stick their fists. – M. de Rozi?res, thank you, but I am not writing, because I am weak, and I have not yet had the strength to look for the ticket from my sister (which, however, I believe I sent earlier). ""If I could have some room upstairs for a servant, write me back, because it may be necessary to burn in the chimneys soon."" ""What am I going back for?"" – Why does God do it so that He doesn't kill me right away, but slowly and through the fever of decisions. Besides, my good Scots bore me again. – Mrs. Erskine, who is a very religious, good-natured Protestant, perhaps she would like to make me a Protestant – because she brings me the Bible, talks about my soul – writes down psalms for me – religious, kind-hearted, but cares a lot about my soul – she always tells me that another a better world than this one - and I know it by heart and I respond with quotations from the Holy Scriptures, and I explain that I can and I know it. I hug you cordially. Write and forgive me that I am angry and impatient, but I am weak. Yours until death Ch. If I were healthy, having 2 lessons every day, I would have enough to live a decent life here - but I'm weak, I'll eat what I have in 3 or 4 months at the most. If you find any dwelling, do not keep it without writing, nor give the congé [5] to mine. [1] Celibater (from French célibataire) - a bachelor. [2] En tout cas - anyway. [3] Table d'hôte – here: room, restaurant. [4] Vous n'?tes pas Français - you are not French. [5] [ Donner ] congé - pronounce, release."
"[...] Art here is painting, woodcarving and architecture. Music is not art, nor is it called art, and if you say an artist, that's what the Englishman thinks a painter, an architect, or a woodcarver. And music is a profession, not an art, and no one will call or print any musician an artist, because in their language and customs it is something else than art, it is a profession. Ask any Englishman and he'll tell you, and here Neukomm assured me so. It's probably the musicians' fault, but start rectifying such things! Freaks play for beauties, and teaching decent things is laughter. Lady..., one of the first great local ladies, with whom I stayed a few days in the castle, a great lady here like a musician. Well, once, after my piano, and after various songs by other Scotchwomen, they bring in a kind of accordion, and she begins to play the most terrible tunes on the accordion with great earnestness. what do you want? Every creature here, it seems to me, lacks staves. The other lady, showing me her album, told me: ""La reine a regardé dedans et j'ai été ? côté d'elle"" [1] . The third is la 13th cousine de Marie Stuart [2]. Another sings, always accompanying herself at the piano for originality, a French-English romance, j'aie aiemaie (j'ai aimé) [3] , yay ajmej!!! The Duchess of Parma told me that one of her whistled to the accompaniment of a guitar. Those who know my compositions ask me: ""Jouez moi votre second Soupir ... j'aime beaucoup vos cloches"" [4] ... And all observation ends with ""leik (like) water"" [5] . it seems to flow like water. I haven't played one English girl yet, so that she wouldn't say to me: ""Leik water!!!"" They all look at their hands and play false notes with great soul. Originals, God forbid: [Caricature here] This is one lord in collar and gaiters stammering. [Second caricature] It's a duke in burnt boots with spurs, moose pants and a kind of robe on top of it. \r\n [1] La reine... d'elle - the queen was looking through it and I was standing next to her. [2] La 13-me... Stuart - thirteenth cousin of Mary Stuart. [3] J'ai aim é – I loved. [4] Jouez... vos cloches – play me your second Sigh... I like your bells very much. [5] Like water (eng.) - like water."
"My dearest Life! Have you forgotten me to conclude from my letters in which I wrote to you that I am getting weaker and more boring, without any hope, without a home, to conclude that I am getting married? The day I received your kind and dear letter from you, I wrote a kind of order with my stuff to do in case I should die somewhere. I've been tossing around Scotland, but it's too cold now, and I'm going back to London tomorrow, because Lord Stuart wrote to me to play on the 16th at a concert they give for Poles before the ball starts. Coming back from Hamilton Palace (60 miles from here), where I was staying with the Duchy of Hamilton for several days, I caught a cold, I haven't been out for five days, I'm staying with Dr Lyszczyński, who treats me homeopathically, and I don't want to go anywhere after my visits, because cholerae is behind the belt, and then, if I fall somewhere, it's now for the whole winter. I promised, if the weather cleared, to return to Hamilton Palace, and from there to go to the Isle of Ayran (which is all theirs), to the Duchess of Baden, what for their son, Marquis Douglas; but nothing will come of it. During my stay there, apart from the great aristocracies of the country and families, there were the Duchy of Parma, Duke Luca, she was the sister of the Duke of Bordeaux (a very cheerful young couple). They have also invited me to Kingston when they return to London, for now they will be living in England since they were expelled from Italy. That's all well, but not for that, and if I left Hamilton in a hurry, it's also because I can't sit at the table from 8 to 10? without pain like Gutmann's (remember?), and in the morning, though I breakfasted myself and came down late and was carried up the stairs, but I am uncomfortable with all this. At Lady Belhaven's Wishaw, where I was also before the Hamiltons, I wrote to you before I received your letter, but such a black, bad letter, I'm glad I didn't send it to you. \r\n After 16 Nov-br, if things improve with you or I'm driven out by the London brouillards [1], I'll return to Paris, if it's not too late to travel. My good Scots, whom I have not seen for some weeks, will be here today; they would like me to stay and pound in Scottish palaces here and there and wherever they ask me. Kind-hearted, but so boring that God forbid!... I receive letters every day, I don't reply to any of them, and whenever I go anywhere, they will follow me if they can. It may be someone's thought that I'm getting married; but nevertheless one needs some physical attrait [2], and the unmarried one is too much like me. How can one kiss oneself... Friendship is friendship, I have clearly said, but it gives no right to anything else... If I could even fall in love with someone who would love me too, if I wished, I would not marry yet, because we had nothing to eat and nowhere to sit. And who is rich, looks for a rich man, and if he is poor, then not a weakling, but a young, handsome one. I hate to slap slowly alone, but together it's the greatest misfortune. I may die in the hospital, but I will not leave my wife without bread. Besides, I don't need to write all this to you, because you know that I think so... [Deletions] So I don't think about my wife at all, but about home, Mother, Sisters. May God let them stay positive! Meanwhile, where has my art gone? And where did I waste my heart? [Deletions] I can barely remember how they sing in Poland. This world somehow passes me by, I forget myself, I have no strength; [Deletions] ...if I go up a little, I'll fall all the lower. I am not complaining to you, but you demanded it, so I explain to you that I am closer to the coffin than to the marriage bed. My mind is quite calm. [Deletions; only the words ""I am resigned"" can be read.] Write me a word. Address: Szulczewski Esq. 10, Duke Street, St. James's. The Polish literary society of Stuart is there. I am not sending the fourth letter written to you, but a fragment from another one, written impatiently, so that you can see how angry I am sometimes. Yours until death Ch. \r\n [1] Brouillard - mist. [2] Attrait – inclination, attraction."
"Yesterday I received your dear letter with your letter from Heidelberg. I am also helpless here as I was with you, and in my heart I also have the same love for you. My greetings to your Wife and your neighbors. God bless you! I hug you with all my heart. I saw the Duchess; as much as possible about you. I currently live at ul. James's Place No. 4. If anything comes to me (from the post office), kindly send it to this address. Please forward the enclosed letter to Miss Stirling, who is probably still at Barnton."
It is possible that I will be well enough to travel this week and arrive in Paris on Thursday, Friday or Saturday (at the latest), as the English climate at this time of year is absolutely impossible for me, even according to the doctor's opinion, but not your M. Curie. From 1 Nov. I don't leave my room, I'm sitting in a bathrobe, and I left only at 16 to play for our compatriots. Would you be so kind as to take a look at number 9 in case I should come over these days. Thank you in advance. Ch. I wrote to Grzym., but he may be on the road and receive my letter late, so go ahead and ask Mrs. Etienne to buy fathomwood and make a good fire in my rooms, and also to vacuum the furniture and curtains well, especially those over the bed, because it seems I think I'll be taking them apart often. Please also have the corners in the bedroom alcoves well swept. I am anxious to be able to breathe easier, understand people and see friendly faces. Ch.
Dear Doctor. Please kindly help my memory as well as good will and send me the bill for your visits. Please believe in my gratitude. Chopin.
"My life! Today I lie down almost all day - but I'm leaving this dog London at this time on Thursday. – I will spend the night from Thursday to Friday in Boulogne, and on Friday I am at Place d'Orléans – to lie down. Apart from the usual things, I have neuralgia and I am swollen. Please make the sheets and pillows dry. - Order to buy cones - let Lady Etienne spare nothing so that you can warm up when you arrive. – I wrote to Derozierka. I wish there were carpets and curtains. Perrichetow, the upholsterer, I'll pay right away - even tell Pleyel to send me any piano on Thursday evening; have him covered. - Order me to buy a bouquet of violets on Friday, so that the drawing room will smell - let me have some more poetry at home when I come back - passing through the room to the bedroom - where I will surely lie down for a long time. – So on Friday in the middle of the day I am in Paris. ""Another day here and I'll go crazy, I won't die."" “My Scots are so dull, God bless. ""Once they're attached, they won't come off."" One X-na Marcelina, who keeps me alive, and her family, and good-natured Szulczewski. ""If there were a room for a servant somewhere in the other stairs, in the meantime - and no, it's a minor matter."" I hug you. Tell me to burn, heat and dust - maybe I'll come to myself again. Yours until death Ch."
Dear Doctor. A thousand times thank you for your kindness - please believe in my gratitude. Chopin.
"You accuse me very wrongly; not a day goes by that I do not try to write to her; I even thought, before receiving your last letter, of inquiring whether your husband might find a job here; I consulted people who know London and its art, and this is what I found out. The society (with the exception of officials, judges, lawyers) never spends the winter in the city. – People of society who could be useful to your husband are not here until March or April, so there is nothing to do here before the next season starts; although it is not certain, it is also not excluded with good letters of recommendation; after a month here, which might not be too expensive, your husband will know what to do. I know several influential people who sincerely promised to help me, but now they could not do anything. As to your affairs in Paris, it is possible that your mother is doing all she can for you, but she has no money, and that you will give back the little things you seem to have bought for this purpose, and that once the house is sold, you will settle matters Lady on new grounds. After all, she is the mother of the Lady and knows her duties towards the Lady. He may forget himself, but he cannot forget you. I'm going to Paris tomorrow. I am struggling and I am as weak as you have never seen me. The doctors here are driving me out. I am swollen with neuralgia, neither breathing nor sleeping nor leaving my room since November 1 (except on 16 to play for an hour at a concert for Poles). It's gotten worse since then, I can't breathe here, it's an unthinkable climate for people like me, but only for a few winter months. - The light comes on at 2. I promise to come back here next season!!! Sir J. Clark, the Queen's physician, has just visited me and has given me his blessing. So I go to the Place d'Orléans whining, expecting improvement. – I advise you quite seriously: enjoy the air in Guillery, perfect for your lungs, and the fact that your husband will be with you. Will come for the rest of the best days. - As for Russia, very influential people who gave me letters of recommendation for your husband to St. Petersburg told me quite clearly that now it is difficult for a Frenchman to get there without great protection. So don't blame Mrs. Obresk[ow], and if England can give him a job, I think he'll find more money and more pleasure here. He won't have to fight the climate, because he has healthy lungs, and if he settles in London, he will be able to prepare work for the season in the winter. A little patience. Perhaps permission from St. Petersburg will come. Nowadays, London is nothing for art. It's a dead season here. All independent people live outside the city, and those who stay are unable to ensure the artist's success. Because the sculpture of your husband, even if it is the most beautiful, must be highly praised for it to be considered beautiful at once. Then just say it's his work and everyone will admire. It must, above all, please the great dukes and peerages of England, but they are all in their castles outside London. Please forgive the chaotic letter, but I am suffering a lot today. Never doubt my old, tried friendship. Ch."
[...] Secondly, I always think of you as one of the people I loved most in the world and for whom I will never change my feelings. When we meet again? So come to the music festival on Pentecost - this time I'm conducting. – Please come, we will spend a few good days and we will happily reminisce about the times gone by! Adieu, always devoted to Ferd. Hiller.
" I serve you, but you do wrong if you really throw what is necessary; I will definitely try to be at your place at 3 a.m. to 6 o'clock, but don't be surprised if I am half a minute late, I will always be at your place before 6 o'clock. Your most affectionate Ch."
 Alba. he wrote me a word and asks me to remind you of his watch business, the delay of which, as he tells me, can cause him a lot of unpleasantness. – I am writing because Chaillot is not quite on the way to the island, and I am not leaving. Ch.
" have been too ill in recent days to be able to write to you and tell you that I have seen her husband. He came to see me on Friday, I found him in good health; he goes to work on the Vanity statue. Yesterday he sent me a word saying that he had already started work. He told me the good news about you, saying that you were bravely enduring your condition and that your health, considering the exceptional circumstances, was quite good. It's March weather here, so I go to bed ten times a day. Molin had the secret to getting me back on my feet. Since then I have consulted Mr. Louis, Dr. Roth for two months, now Mr. Simon, of great authority among homeopaths! but they grope in the dark, and bring me no relief. Everyone agrees that I need a good atmosphere, peace and rest. I will find rest one day and without their help. The tranquility of Paris was not for a moment disturbed during those days, though some riots were expected because of the mobile guards, which were rationed, or because of the Ministry's proposal to dissolve the clubs. Yesterday, Monday, there were soldiers and cannons everywhere, and this firm stance impressed those who wanted to cause disorder. – Even I write to you about politics instead of writing about funnier things. But I'm getting more and more dull, which I attribute to drinking cocoa instead of my coffee every morning. Never drink cocoa and advise your friends against drinking it, especially those who correspond with you. In a future letter I will try to write - after taking some sulfate that Mr. Simon is to give me to inhale - with more wit. In the meantime, please read these scribbles which contain news of your husband's health and good disposition. – Mrs. Obreskow visited me yesterday, but Baron Stockhausen, Legouvé and others were with me, to whom I did not want to talk about St. Petersburg, because you know how good she is and how much she talks. If you would like to write me a word about your health, this time would not be misused. Happiness, health, health Ch."
Please come to me today Saturday or tomorrow Sunday. I have something important to ask you. I would have gone to Caumartin myself, but I am not moving much yet. T. a. v. Ch.
 saw Mrs. Obreskow, but she had nothing to say to you. I have the impression that the political horizon is getting cloudier from that side and that what was difficult a month ago will be even more difficult now. I learned from M. de Rozi?res that you are well. May God keep you in good health. I don't know what to do anymore. – I already have a fourth doctor, they take 10 francs each. for a visit, sometimes they come twice a day so as to bring me almost no relief. Saturday Your husband just visited me before I could finish this letter. She looks excellent, and it gave me great pleasure to bring good news about your health. You can't have everything in this world, let yourself be satisfied with the greatest happiness, which is health. Your husband is going to London, and I think he is doing well. It is possible that he will have great success there. I, too, will try to be of some use, if possible, by bringing him news concerning England as well as letters. Please don't doubt it.
" am sending you all my scribbling so that you will know that it is not laziness, but weakness or something similar that prevents me from writing to you. Your husband is well; he visited me again yesterday and said he would be presented to the president on Monday; is of the best mind; he also saw Delacroix (who told me that someone wanted to commission a bust from the Lady's husband). Opportunities are never equal in this world, M. de la Palisse would say; these are the only truths I can state, please forgive me for sharing them with you. For example, I hope that the spring sun will be my best doctor. It should be added: spring, because in the opera they prepare the sun for the Prophet, which, it seems, will be more beautiful than all tropical suns. This sun only rises and shines briefly, but it is so strong that it casts everything in shadow except the music. They consist of beams of electric light. I was too sick to go to rehearsal the day before yesterday, but I'm hoping for a premiere next Monday. There is a lot of talk about ice skating, about skaters (on roller skates); miracles tell about a fire, a beautiful exhibition and about Mrs. Viardot, who will move everyone to tears as a mother. This is where the deletions begin. I am asking for news as soon as you can. Enjoy the climate there. Paris is terrible. The weather changes 36 times, mud, drafts in the room. There is nothing tolerable, everything is disgusting for now. Devoted Ch."
"My Chopin. I wanted to report my joy much sooner, but I was so weak that I couldn't bring myself to do it. I have a daughter as huge as that one was small. I could not tell you whether she is ugly or pretty; to me she is delightful; for it cannot be otherwise. At any rate, it is certain that she is neither hunchbacked nor lame, and that she is in excellent health. However, it is far less pretty than the first one. She was too pretty to live. “I want to ask you for a favor, and that is to encourage my husband. I received a letter from him this morning that shows complete discouragement. In it, he mentions that he wants to come back here instead of going to London. He says it's too late to make the trip now. And I think it's never too late, and I urge him to go. I scolded him this morning, which I regret now, because it will hurt him. Persuade him, because you are here, to go to London and not to Guillery. Even if he didn't get commissions for the busts, he might be able to sell the statue, that would be good. But if he comes back here to hunt and fish with his rod, we'll never get out of this sad situation. Now that we have a baby, it would be time to think about it. I hope the Lord will preach to him. He will certainly take to heart what he hears, for he has much friendship and respect for the Lord. Please scold him and then comfort him because he is unhappy. We'll probably send him the money tomorrow. I hope you are staying healthy in such beautiful weather. It's already very hot here. Adieu, my Chopin, I send you a cordial handshake and many words of gratitude for your kindness. Solange."
 friend, very unhappy, blesses the Lady and her child. You have to trust that the future will bring you comfort and will be kinder to her. Youth is valid. It means that you must be happy and remember those who love you. Ch.
"Dear Fryderyk. I received your letter on the 16th of this month, in which you report that you are healthier; it's a real binder for me. ABOUT! How I would like to be with You, to look after You as before, and since this cannot be, I must agree with the will of the Most High, and He, out of His mercy, will send You friends who will replace me. Just trust in Him and be at peace, my dearest. I hope you need some money now; In the meantime, I am sending you what I can: twelve hundred francs, and good-natured Barciński will explain to you how you must continue to do so that you do not find yourself in need, and now may God bless you and give you health, that is what your loving Mother begs Him for."
"How are you - I think that the countryside will at least serve you physically. - I'm not leaving - only sometimes to the boulognese forest - I'm stronger because I ate and threw away the medicines - but I'm panting and coughing the same way, only I can bear it easier. - I haven't started playing yet - I can't compose - I don't know what kind of hay I'm going to eat soon. “Everyone is leaving – some for fear of cholera, others for fear of revolution. - Mademoiselle de Roziéres also moved to Versailles out of fear, but she has returned. – English girls to St.-Germ., Obresk[off] St. Germain. I haven't seen Pot[ock] in Versailles for a long time. – I am also without Garde malady [1] 2nd week. – X-żna Czar[toryska] visited me; not wanting me to be alone at night, he sends me Mrs. Matuszewska, who was a nanny at X-żna Róża's. There was also X-że and he was asking about you. – I don't know who you told to say that you were at the waters, but without knowing it, I told him that you were in the country - and he told me that they told him that you were at the waters. “Kalkbrenner died, De la Rocha's elder son died in Versailles. Franchomm's maid of good died very much. There was no death at the Cours d'Orléans, only little Etienne was terminally ill. - At that moment, the Scots arrived - between the news they said about Noals that he was healthier, to which I said that the king of Ch. Albert in Lisbon died. ""They choke me with boredom."" I leave my apartment at the end of the month and return to Squar, because there is no other way. Cochet is back. My Dr Fraenkel - I can't find out from him where to go to the waters or to go south - he took his tyzanna again, gave another medicine, he doesn't want it again - and when I ask about hygiene, he says that I don't need a regular life. - In a word, head to the tops. A joke on the side - very good, maybe a consulting doctor - like Koreff - but there is no suite [2] in the head - like Koreff. Miss Lind was - she sang at my place one evening - there was Mrs Pot[ocka], Beauv[eau], Rotsch[ild] - and she has already gone - to Sweden via Hamb[urg]. Mrs. Catalani, whom she met here on the eve of her departure, died of cholera. I only saw Cichowski once, as I wrote to you. - It's far from the city - it's only those who love me very much, such as Franch [omme], or who have loved ones close, such as the 10th, sometimes they visit me. Pleyel was also today - good-natured. - I did not see Gutmann with all my heart after 10 days - until I was afraid, whether he was ill, but he wrote to me that he was well. “The disease is already in the city. “Delacroix has been in the country for a week. - Give me a word about yourself. – I hug you warmly. Your Ch. [1] Garde malady (from French garde malade) – a nurse. [2] Suite (French) – order, logic."
"how are you? Write a word. I wrote to you in those days through Mr. Ludw. Perhaps the letter hasn't been sent to you yet. I saw Cichowski and Duchess Sapieżyna today. The Duchess didn't ask for you. When he was leaving, Cichowski told me that he knew about your events (of which I had not told him anything). He couldn't tell me anything about you, just like I could tell him. I only learned through Zaleski that Mr. Plichcina was going to Warsaw in 10 days; it might be of some use to you. Know about it. Cochet, who was with Lumirski today, could not tell me anything about your son, because he was not in Warsaw. So (of course!!!) he didn't see it. Everyone is leaving here. I haven't seen Mrs. Potocka or Duchess Beauveau for 10 days. They are in Versailles. I had hemorrhage [1] on two occasions tonight. But I did nothing and I spit blood, but far less. This is what brought Duchess Sap[ieżyna] to me, because my Polish woman who watches over me at night told her about it. My Jew Fraenkel has been gone for a week now; at the end he didn't even put the papers in the urine anymore, he just talked to me about an Englishman whom he had saved from cholera with a medicine, which the French reactionary government (Fauchet) did not ask him to bring. Left to myself, maybe I'll climb out sooner. I will probably return to Square next month. Virg. came to tell me that she was going with her Deput. to Bret[ania]. She asked for news from you; I had nothing to say. Don't come back if you can sit through the heat tolerably and healthily. Surely your Adone and Cich[owski] bode well for your business, so that when you return you will be less restless. – I am finishing, because it is a torture for me to write, even to you. So many things behind the pen. Your father. Mrs. Obreskow, who was here yesterday from St. Germain, she asked about the General and the evil that Gen. has been sitting so far and long in this village. I said you came back and had to go again. [1] Hemoragia – hemorrhage."
"My baby. I wanted to go to you alone, but I was too weak. – Today at 8 o'clock the police commissioner came to me to ask about Grzy[mała]. - I would like to see you and tell you - I even ordered a carriage to be brought, but I have no strength to go. – Please, for God's sake, tell me to take it to the hotel; my ambulance will be waiting for you. - Say a word to my Englishman. Your Ch."
"My life. If you can, then come. I am weak and no doctors can help me like you. If you don't have money, borrow it; if I am better, I will easily earn and give back to the one who will lend you, but now I am too naked to send to you. My apartment here in Chaillot is big enough to accommodate you with at least 2 children. A little human would profit for all reasons. Kalasanta's father would run around all day - the fetuses exhibition next door - in short, he would have more free time for himself than before, because I am weaker and I will stay at home with Ludwika more. My friends and people who wish me well, find that Ludwika's arrival here is the best medicine for me, as Ludwika will probably find out from Mrs. Ob[reskow's letter. So apply for a passport[ort]. As people told me today - one from the north, the other from the south, people who do not know Ludwika - said that it is not only healthy for me, but my sister should be healthy. So, mother Louise and daughter Louise, bring a thimble and knitting needles, I will give you handkerchiefs to mark and stockings to knit, and you will spend a few months here in the open air with your old brother and uncle. Traveling is easier now. You don't need a lot of packages. Here, as we can, we live cheaply. You will find housing and food. Even if sometimes Kalasantem from Elysian fields is far from the city, he will be able to afford it in the Square d'Orléans, in my apartment. Omnibuses go from the Squaru right up to the door here. I don't know why I want Ludwika so much, but it's as if I was with hope. I promise it will be good for her too. I hope the family council will send it to me; who knows if I won't see her off if I say hello. Only then would we all hug each other, as I have already written, only without wigs and with teeth. It is always the wife who owes obedience to her husband, so it is the husband who must be asked to bring his wife. So I ask him very much, and if he considers it, he will probably not give her or me greater pleasure and usefulness, even to children, if he brings one (I have no doubt about a daughter). Money is expended, it's true, but you can't use it better or travel cheaper. Once in place there will be a roof. Write me a word soon. Mrs. Ob[reskow], who was kind enough to write (I gave Ludwika's address), may convince more. Miss de Rozi?res will also do well, and Cochet would also do well, for he certainly did not find me cured. His esculapius had been absent for 10 days, because he finally realized that there was something above his science. However, praise him very much to your lodger and others who know him, and say that he has done me a lot of good, but that I am such a head that as soon as I get a little better, I am so content; that everyone finds that he has cured many people of cholera here. Cholera is already very much subsiding, almost gone. It's beautiful weather today, I'm sitting in the living room and admiring my view of all Paris: the tower, the Tullerie, the Chamber, St. Germ[ain], l'Aux[errois], St. Etienne du Mont, Notre-Dame, Pantheon, St. Sulpice, Val-de-Grâce, Invalides, with 5 windows and nothing but gardens between us. You'll see when you arrive. Now for the passport and for the money, move quickly and slowly. ""Write me a word now."" After all, even cypresses have their whims: my whim today is to see you here. Maybe God will let it be fine, and if God won't let you, at least do what God would allow. I am of good hope because I rarely ask for much and I would refrain from doing so if I wasn't spoiled by all those who wish me well. Move, Mr. Kalasanty, I'll give you a perfect big cigar for that; I know someone who famously smokes, nb. in the garden. I hope that my letter for Mameczka's name day arrived and I didn't miss it. I don't want to think about all this, because it's feverish; and I do not have a fever by the grace of God, which irritates and angers all ordinary doctors. Your brother attached but weak Ch. \r\n"
My baby. Grzymale was so diligent with his watch business, which Cichowski told you about, that he wrote to me to implore you, for all the crosses and flats that could ever exist between us, to speed up this matter. – It cost, as you know, 900 francs. He doesn't want to wait, so he doesn't think about getting more, he even writes that you can arrange these things cheaper, if only quickly. “My darling, move for our old friendship. – God will take good care of your Lithuanian boy, and will give Mrs. Orda a hundred years of health. In the meantime, please pay her my respects. I hug you less as before, but with the same heart as before. Your Ch.
"My life. Cich[owski] was with me yesterday, for the second time since your departure (because I wrote to him about the watch) - he said that he gave your letter to the Orda - and that he would speed up if possible. “The tailor agreed to the settlement. He also told me that Mrs. Plichcina was going home - that he had written to you about it, and that my sister was coming here, which is not the case, because I am thinking of writing about it only today. But you know his news. – Madame Pot[ocka] always in Versailles and will go to Dieppe, where Mr. Beauveau. Delacroix in the countryside. Gutm[ann] in London (incognito) as if he had money to waste. – English girls in St. Germain. – P. Obresk[ow] also. It is good that you had news from your son, for Cochet did not see him. Frenkiel has been gone for two weeks. I haven't been spitting blood since the day before, my legs are swollen. - Only I'm still weak and lazy, I can't walk - I pant. – And your stairs!! I regret not seeing you, but I prefer that you are in the country now as here, which is so boring and there is no one. I am writing to you for the third time at Mrs. Ludw. since I'm without your gardemalada. I don't know what to do with her, how to thank her. I don't want to send her there, because the guardian is there or someone. She was here to say she was leaving, but someone came in before he could talk, so she slipped out. She sent me her business card. “Honest and good, but I don't understand this card. “I hope he will come again before he leaves for Brittany. I would not want to send there, because Deput. she knows nothing about me - and I'm afraid of giving her innocent trouble. Be healthy - watch yourself and don't give up - I am also defending myself as much as I can - but apparently I will run out of strength. Mrs. Matuszewska, who visited X-na Róża (who was sent to me by X-na Anna so that I would not be alone for the night), says that ""the Lord Jesus will transform"" and maybe a honeycomb and flour would help. Ch."
"Thank you for your good letter, ma'am. I have received a few words from M. Bouscinat, in which he informs me of the instructions he has received from you regarding my carriage, but the new hemorrhage changes my departure plans for the time being. It is also possible that the emperor, who is in Warsaw at the moment, will grant my sister permission to go to visit me; so it is only after much consideration that I shall know whether I must leave Paris or whether I must stay here, for I can no longer bear long journeys. Let's not talk about me anymore. “I was pleased to learn that you made the journey as far as Bordeaux without tiring, but that does not prove that you should not spare yourself. I imagine your little daughter with a big head, laughing, screaming, making noise, salivating, biting, although she has no teeth, etc. You two must look very funny. When will you start teaching her riding? I hope that now you have enough to do at all hours, and that you would like to double the hours of day and night, although the Gascon has to wake you often. ""I'm starting to cross out again."" I have nothing more to write except that I wish her, as you have known for a long time, all possible prosperity. “The cholera is getting better, but they tell me Paris is getting empty. Heat and dust. A lot of poverty and dirt, you see faces from the other world. All Crémieux, apparently even Bignat got sick. D'Arpentigny is blond and getting more beautiful. – They do not say anything good about the exhibition. “Delacroix has been in the country for a few weeks, he's a little ill, maybe he'll go to Aachen. I am pleased to know that you are staying in your beautiful land. This is not the time to live in the city. Please be so kind and write me two words when my daughter will give her a moment of peace, so that I have news about the health of all of you, now that the family has grown by such a large piece. Be happy everyone. Ch."
" am very weak, my Life. I have a diary [1] of some kind. Yesterday I consulted Cruveille, who tells me to take almost nothing, but to sit still. He said that if homeopathy was good for me in Molin's time, it was because he didn't burden me with medications and left a lot to nature. But I see that he also thinks I am consumptive, because he prescribed me a teaspoon of something with lichen. – So I wrote, unable to go to Plichcina; besides that, it's supposed to be with me. – I also wrote to Orda. Orda hasn't replied yet. I am also sending you a letter that came for you from Germany. Mrs. Brzozowska (née Zamoyska) rented a flat above me. The Zamoyskis went to Billancourt. In this way, I shall probably see the X more often until they leave for Trouville, where they are going. X-woman Marcelina in London, because she was ordered or implied to leave Vienna. I haven't seen Cichowski for two weeks. Pani Potocka in Versailles, then she is supposedly going to Spa. It's hot here. I haven't heard from my sister yet. I'm going to stay here this month, but if my sister doesn't come, I'm leaving, because it's all too expensive for me. I play less and less; I can't write anything. \r\n Stay well. Work on your brochure; don't be poor either. nor boring. You've endured so much already. God will give you strength and everything else. Your Ch. [1] Diara (from French diarrhée) – diarrhea. \r\n"
"Dear Mr. Chopin. I don't want to bore you with a long letter, but I can't stay ignorant of your health and your future projects either. Don't write it yourself, but ask Madame Etienne or that good old grandmother who dreams of chops to tell me how your strength, breasts, shortness of breath, etc., etc. are. You have to seriously think about Nice for the winter. Mrs. Augustowa Potocka wrote back that she would try her best to obtain permission for Mrs. Andrzejewiczowa [!], but that the difficulties were very great in this unhappy country. I am sorry to feel that you are so alone in sickness and sorrow; a few words please: Aix-la-Chapelle, poste restante. I would also like to hear about that Jew, did he come and rely on something? It's sad and dull here, but for me life goes the same way everywhere; as long as it passed without worse sufferings and trials, it was enough for what had already been endured. Somehow I was not lucky in the world! To whom I wished well, such a creature always repaid me with ingratitude or various other tribunals [1] . Au total [2] this life is just a huge dissonance. God protect you, dear Mr. Chopin. See you at the beginning of October at the latest. D. Potocka. [1] Tribulation - worry. [2] Au total (French) - here; generally."
"After your answer and her letter, my hands fell off and I didn't know whether to consider her hallucination or her afides [1] a thief, whether to suspect Mrs. She came to me with confessions [2] and answered me so stupidly, and my sister pretended not to know anything about it, that I had to tell many truths, as I would understand such generous gifts from no one but the Queen of England or Miss Couty, etc. But it happens. This gentleman, to whom such a sum had been entrusted despite his knowledge, and who had not taken a slip from Madame Etienne that he had given the letter or package, went to Alexei somnambul. This is where the drama begins: Alexis tells him that one Thursday in March (8th) he delivered very important papers to (write my name) that this package did not arrive at destination [3] that he did not have it, that he gave it in a small, dark room, where you go down two stairs, to some woman (there were two of them) and that it was picked up by the taller one, who had one letter in her hand, which the postal agent gave her, and who, having taken the letter en question [4] from this gentleman, she told him she would take it right away, but Alexis added that she had carried it downstairs without even showing it to me, that I had never seen the letter. When they asked him if he didn't see what was going on with the letter, he said he couldn't see it, but if they brought him hair or a handkerchief or gloves, he would say what the person who received the letter was supposed to be. Mrs. Erskine was present at Alexe's séance, and she came to me yesterday to tell me about it and how to get something that belongs to Mrs. Etienne to give to Alexei. I told Mrs. Etienne to come in on the pretext of bringing me Boist and handkerchiefs, and when she came, it was to get rid of Mrs. Erskine, who wanted my hair for some somnambula who treats the sick in St. Germain (where these Scots girls live now), so as if to get rid of it, I say that if she knows whose hair it is, if I send her Madame Etienne's hair, I will believe and send mine, but I'm sure she will take healthy hair for sick. So Mrs. Etienne cut off her hair at my request, wrapped it up, and Mrs. Erskine took it. This morning this Mr. Afides comes to me with Mrs. Erskine from Alex. Alexis recognized the hair of the person to whom the package was given, said that she had put the package sealed in some piece of furniture near the bed, that the package was still with her and that it had not been lost or returned or unsealed. That if this gentleman takes it well, he'll give it back to him, but you have to be careful. So this gentleman from me straight from here at 12 o'clock went to Square d'Orléans, found Mrs. Etienne alone, reminded her that he had been to give her a package for me in March, which he told her was very important. She met him and gave him back the package that had given her back so many months ago. It was unsealed and 25,000 was untouched. Mrs. Erskine unsealed it at my place, with me and this gentleman. What do you say? That somnambulum!!! This package, so long abandoned, untouched!!! It breaks my head over such special cases. – It can be judged that I did not accept the donation, and much would be written about it. I'd like to tell you sometime. “Believe in magnetism now. ""Thank goodness you found it."" Many details that I do not write to you because my pen burns me. And now for something else. The Archbishop of Sapież[yna], Izia, and Władzio went to Dieppe today. X-na Wirtem[berska] stayed. Plichcin is probably already in Warsaw. I'm starting to doubt my sister. Not worse or better for me. I love you and would like to see you. I hug you yours. write. I have nothing new about Orda. [1] Afides (from French affidé) – trusted. [2] Confession - confession. [3] ? sa destination )fr.) – to the destination. [4] En question (French) – the person in question."
My dear. Send me some of your Bordeaux. I need a glass of wine tonight, and I don't have any at home. But pack the bottle and don't forget to put your stamp on it, because those messengers!! I don't know who you're entrusting this shipment to. How suspicious I have become! Your totally C
"You won't believe how much I want to see you even for an hour, but I can't ask you to get out of your hole, because although not 200, but only a dozen or so of the Democratic Society (he knew none of them) were ordered to leave, but it's a delicate thing if you you are afraid. As far as my particular case is concerned, there are many, many special things that I cannot agree with magnetism, and with lies or hallucinations (P. St[irling]), and with Mrs. Etienne's honesty. It could even be, que la chose ? été faite apr?s coup [1] . Much has to be said about this; also that some other anonyme letter had been sent to me, which I handed over to myself. I haven't said a word about all this with Mrs. Etienne, and I still don't, even though it's a week tomorrow. The letter could have been delivered to her three days in advance; I was not at home and she was here, it was possible to pick up without somnambula, as well as with somnambulum. The more so that the coincidence of various talks!! There is heart, but also ostentation! I'd like to see you. Clésinger brought Solange after 10 days of heat travel with the baby and wet nurse here, without money and when everyone is fleeing to the countryside! Where is the mind, I don't know!! Without a head, or rather - with a very ugly head! De Rozi?res is gone; is at the waters in Belgium with Mrs. Grille [De Beuzelin]. So Sol goes looking for an apartment. He wants to find something near Chaillot; it's scary, what a fool! ""Except Franch., Herbeault, all in the country."" Mrs. Obresk[ow] in St. germ[ain]; always on monday visits me here. I drink Bonnes waters. My sister doesn't have permission yet. After that, it won't be of any use, because his vacation will be over. I'm panting, coughing and lethargic; I don't do anything, I don't want anything. This Alexis is on my mind. Your Ch. I haven't seen silence for two weeks. About Virg. I don't know. The Orda watch did not sell. He gave it to Cich[owski]. Those to whom he proposed last dispute the authenticity. They looked at Bréguet in books; there is no mention of it. Your other interests have probably closed since then. The old prince and Sapieha visited me yesterday evening. Duchess, Izia and Władzia healthy in Dieppe. [1] Que la chose... apr?s coup (French) - the thing was done after the fact."
My sister and Jędrz[ejewicz] and my niece have been with me for 5 days. I'm very tired. They too. I wish you as much happiness as I have at the moment, but a little more health, because I am weaker than ever. Your sincere friend Ch. Respect to Mr. Gr[ille] de Beuzelin. [Postscript by Ludwika Jądrzejewiczowa] One word only, because the letter should be sent to the post office. So here I am with my dearest Fryderyk, who is in great pain and regrets very much that he cannot embrace you, my dear and good friend. I would have stopped at Chaudfontaine, if our train had not passed there at night. I thought about it, for what an indescribable pleasure it would be to see you. Anyway, you know how much we love you. So there is no need to assure you of how sorry we were to be forced to reject the thought. I will be delighted to finally see you in Paris, where we speak of you so often, dear friend. You cannot understand how I wish your arrival would give some blissful moments to dear Fryderyk, who is very tired today and suffers more than ever from insomnia and coughing fits. Ludwisia gave him great pleasure. The rest of the message for another time, because the letter must be sealed. Goodbye dear friend! My husband sends you many good words, and I hug you with all my heart. L.J
My life. Be kind and set an hour for me today when I can find you. Ludwika is here - glad to see you. I hug you cordially. Chopin.
 My dearest you. I must be as weak as I am, so that I cannot move from Paris when You come to Ostend. But I hope that God will allow you to come closer to me. The doctors won't let me travel. I drink Pyrenean waters in my room, and your presence would be worth more to me than all medicines. Yours until death Frederick.
"He had too little time to obtain permission for you to come here; unable to follow it myself, lying in bed half the day, I asked a friend who had influence to do it for me. I won't know for sure until Saturday. I wanted to go abroad by rail to Valenciennes to embrace you, but a few days ago it was impossible for me to go to Ville d'Avraye near Versailles to visit my goddaughter, and the doctors won't let me leave Paris. Therefore, for the winter to a warmer climate, they do not even let go. It's my fault that I'm sick, because if I was in Belgium, I got somewhere. Maybe you can get here too. I am not egotistical enough to demand You for myself; being weak as I am, you would have a few hours of boredom and deception [1] mixed with a few hours of amusement and good remembrance; and I would prefer that the time we spend together was only a time of complete happiness. Yours forever Fryderyk. [1] Deception - disappointment, disappointment. \r\n"
Dear friend. I am very sorry that you have suffered so much in Mans. But now you are in Tourraine, whose sky will perhaps be kinder to you. “As for me, I feel worse rather than better. Messrs. Cruveiller, Louis and Blache decided by council that I should not leave now, but take an apartment on the south side and stay in Paris. After a long search, a very expensive apartment was found, meeting all the required conditions - at Place Vendôme No. 12. Albrecht currently has his office there. Meara was very helpful when looking for an apartment. I will finally see you all next winter - well placed [word deleted], my sister stays with me, unless she is urgently summoned to the country. – I love you, and that is all I can say to you for now, because I am falling from drowsiness and weakness. My sister is glad to see your wife again, and so am I with all my heart. It will be as it should be. Many beautiful bows to Mr. and Mrs. Forest - how I would love to spend a few days with you. Does Mrs. Lauvergeat also play by the sea? Don't forget to give her and Mrs. Lauvergeat my regards. Kiss your children, write me a word. Always Your Ch. My sister kisses Madame Franchomme.
